









































Microsoft Word - Kuhn_2.docx


 
 

INTERNATIONAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA  of  UNIFIED  SCIENCE 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Structure of Scientific  
Revolutions 

 
 

Second Edition, Enlarged 
 

 
 

Thomas S. Kuhn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VOLUMES I AND II  •  FOUNDATIONS OF THE UNITY OF SCIENCE 
VOLUME  II  •  NUMBER  2 



International Encyclopedia of Unified Science 
 
Editor-in-Chief    Otto Neurath  
Associate Editors    Rudolf Carnap    Charles Morris 
 
Foundations of the Unity of Science 
(Volumes I—II of the Encyclopedia) 
 
Committee of Organization 
 
RUDOLF CARNAP  CHARLES MORRIS 
PHILIPP FRANK  OTTO NEURATH 
JOERGEN JOERGENSEN  LOUIS ROUGIER 
 
Advisory Committee 
 
NIELS BOHR  R. VON MISES 
EGON BRUNSWIK  G. MANNOURY 
J. CLAY  ERNEST NAGEL 
JOHN DEWEY  ARNE NAESS 
FEDERIGO ENRIQUES  HANS REICHENBACH 
HERBERT FEIGL  ABEL REY 
CLARK L. HULL  BERTRAND RUSSELL 
WALDEMAR KAEMPFFERT L. SUSAN STEBBING 
VICTOR F. LENZEN  ALFRED TARSKI 
JAN LUKASIEWICZ  EDWARD C. TOLMAN 
WILLIAM M. MALISOFF  JOSEPH H. WOODGER 
 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, CHICAGO 60637 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, LTD., LONDON 

 
© 1962, 1970 by The University of Chicago. 

All rights reserved. Published 1962. 
Second Edition, enlarged, 1970 

 
Printed in the United States of America 

 
81 80 79 78 11 10 9 8 

 
ISBN: 0-226-45803-2 (clothbound); 0-226-45804-0 (paperbound) 

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 79-107472 



 
International Encyclopedia of Unified Science 
Volume 2 • Number 2 
 

 

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 
Thomas S. Kuhn 

 
 
Contents: 

           PREFACE         ......................................................        v 

I.      INTRODUCTION: A ROLE FOR HISTORY ............       1 

II.     THE ROUTE TO NORMAL SCIENCE ....................     10 

III.    THE NATURE OF NORMAL SCIENCE .................     23 

IV.    NORMAL SCIENCE AS PUZZLE-SOLVING ...........     35 

V.     THE PRIORITY OF PARADIGMS ..........................     43 

VI.   ANOMALY AND THE EMERGENCE OF SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERIES   52 

VII.  CRISIS AND THE EMERGENCE OF SCIENTIFIC THEORIES            66 

VIII. THE RESPONSE TO CRISIS .................................             77 

IX.   THE NATURE AND NECESSITY OF SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTIONS  92 

X.     REVOLUTIONS AS CHANGES OF WORLD VIEW ......            111 

XI.   THE INVISIBILITY OF REVOLUTIONS .................     136 

XII.  THE RESOLUTION OF REVOLUTIONS ................    144 

XIII. PROGRESS THROUGH REVOLUTIONS ................    160 

         Postscript-1969 ................................................    174 
 

 
iii 



 



 
 
 
 
 
Preface 

 
The essay that follows is the first full published report on a project 

originally conceived almost fifteen years ago. At that time I was a 
graduate student in theoretical physics already within sight of the end 
of my dissertation. A fortunate involvement with an experimental 
college course treating physical science for the non-scientist provided 
my first exposure to the history of science. To my complete surprise, that 
exposure to out-of-date scientific theory and practice radically 
undermined some of my basic conceptions about the nature of science 
and the reasons for its special success. 

Those conceptions were ones I had previously drawn partly from 
scientific training itself and partly from a long-standing avocational 
interest in the philosophy of science. Somehow, whatever their 
pedagogic utility and their abstract plausibility, those notions did not at 
all fit the enterprise that historical study displayed. Yet they were and 
are fundamental to many discussions of science, and their failures of 
verisimilitude therefore seemed thoroughly worth pursuing. The result 
was a drastic shift in my career plans, a shift from physics to history of 
science and then, gradually, from relatively straightforward historical 
problems back to the more philosophical concerns that had initially led 
me to history. Except for a few articles, this essay is the first of my 
published works in which these early concerns are dominant. In some 
part it is an attempt to explain to myself and to friends how I happened 
to be drawn from science to its history in the first place. 

My first opportunity to pursue in depth some of the ideas set forth 
below was provided by three years as a Junior Fellow of the Society of 
Fellows of Harvard University. Without that period of freedom the 
transition to a new field of study would have been far more difficult and 
might not have been achieved. Part of my time in those years was 
devoted to history of science proper. In particular I continued to study 
the writings of Alex- 

 
Vol. II, No. 2  
v 



Preface 
 

andre Koyré and first encountered those of Emile Meyerson, Hélène 
Metzger, and Anneliese Maier.1 More clearly than most other recent 
scholars, this group has shown what it was like to think scientifically in a 
period when the canons of scientific thought were very different from 
those current today. Though I increasingly question a few of their 
particular historical interpretations, their works, together with A. O. 
Lovejoy’s Great Chain of Being, have been second only to primary source 
materials in shaping my conception of what the history of scientific 
ideas can be. 

Much of my time in those years, however, was spent exploring fields 
without apparent relation to history of science but in which research 
now discloses problems like the ones history was bringing to my 
attention. A footnote encountered by chance led me to the experiments 
by which Jean Piaget has illuminated both the various worlds of the 
growing child and the process of transition from one to the next.2 One of 
my colleagues set me to reading papers in the psychology of perception, 
particularly the Gestalt psychologists; another introduced me to B. L. 
Whorf’s speculations about the effect of language on world view; and W. 
V. O. Quine opened for me the philosophical puzzles of the analytic-
synthetic distinction.3 That is the sort of random exploration that the 
Society of Fellows permits, and only through it could I have encountered 
Ludwik Fleck’s almost unknown monograph, Entstehung und 
Entwicklung einer wis- 

 
1 Particularly influential were Alexandre Koyré, Études Galiléennes (3 vols.; 
Paris, 1939); Emile Meyerson, Identity and Reality, trans. Kate Loewenberg (New 
York, 1930); Hélène Metzger, Les doctrines chimiques en France du début du XVIIe à 
la fin du XVIIIe siècle (Paris, 1923), and Newton, Stahl, Boerhaave et la doctrine 
chimique (Paris, 1930); and Anneliese Maier, Die Vorläufer Galileis im 14. 
Jahrhundert (“Studien zur Naturphilosophie der Spätscholastik”; Rome, 1949). 
2 Because they displayed concepts and processes that also emerge directly from 
the history of science, two sets of Piaget s investigations proved particularly 
important: The Child’s Conception of Causality, trans. Marjorie Gabain (London, 
1930), and Les notions de mouvement et de vitesse chez l’enfant (Paris, 1946). 
3  Whorf’s papers have since been collected by John B. Carroll, Language, 
Thought, and Reality—Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf (New York, 1956). 
Quine has presented his views in “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” reprinted in his 
From a Logical Point of View (Cambridge, Mass., 1953), pp. 20-46. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
vi 



Preface 
 

senschaftlichen Tatsache (Basel, 1935), an essay that anticipates many of 
my own ideas. Together with a remark from another Junior Fellow, 
Francis X. Sutton, Fleck’s work made me realize that those ideas might 
require to be set in the sociology of the scientific community. Though 
readers will find few references to either these works or conversations 
below, I am indebted to them in more ways than I can now reconstruct 
or evaluate. 

During my last year as a Junior Fellow, an invitation to lecture for the 
Lowell Institute in Boston provided a first chance to try out my still 
developing notion of science. The result was a series of eight public 
lectures, delivered during March, 1951, on “The Quest for Physical 
Theory.” In the next year I began to teach history of science proper, and 
for almost a decade the problems of instructing in a field I had never 
systematically studied left little time for explicit articulation of the ideas 
that had first brought me to it. Fortunately, however, those ideas proved 
a source of implicit orientation and of some problem-structure for much 
of my more advanced teaching. I therefore have my students to thank 
for invaluable lessons both about the viability of my views and about the 
techniques appropriate to their effective communication. The same 
problems and orientation give unity to most of the dominantly 
historical, and apparently diverse, studies I have published since the end 
of my fellowship. Several of them deal with the integral part played by 
one or another metaphysic in creative scientific research. Others 
examine the way in which the experimental bases of a new theory are 
accumulated and assimilated by women committed to an incompatible 
older theory. In the process they describe the type of development that I 
have below called the “emergence” of a new theory or discovery. There 
are other such ties besides. 

The final stage in the development of this essay began with an 
invitation to spend the year 1958-59 at the Center for Advanced Studies 
in the Behavioral Sciences. Once again I was able to give undivided 
attention to the problems discussed below. Even more important, 
spending the year in a community 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
vii 



Preface 
 

composed predominantly of social scientists confronted me with 
unanticipated problems about the differences between such 
communities and those of the natural scientists among whom I had 
been trained. Particularly, I was struck by the number and extent of the 
overt disagreements between social scientists about the nature of 
legitimate scientific problems and methods. Both history and 
acquaintance made me doubt that practitioners of the natural sciences 
possess firmer or more permanent answers to such questions than their 
colleagues in social science. Yet, somehow, the practice of astronomy, 
physics, chemistry, or biology normally fails to evoke the controversies 
over fundamentals that today often seem endemic among, say, 
psychologists or sociologists. Attempting to discover the source of that 
difference led me to recognize the role in scientific research of what I 
have since called “paradigms.” These I take to be universally recognized 
scientific achievements that for a time provide model problems and 
solutions to a community of practitioners. Once that piece of my puzzle 
fell into place, a draft of this essay emerged rapidly. 

The subsequent history of that draft need not be recounted here, but 
a few words must be said about the form that it has preserved through 
revisions. Until a first version had been completed and largely revised, I 
anticipated that the manuscript would appear exclusively as a volume in 
the Encyclopedia of Unified Science. The editors of that pioneering work 
had first solicited it, then held me firmly to a commitment, and finally 
waited with extraordinary tact and patience for a result. I am much 
indebted to them, particularly to Charles Morris, for wielding the 
essential goad and for advising me about the manuscript that resulted. 
Space limits of the Encyclopedia made it necessary, however, to present 
my views in an extremely condensed and schematic form. Though 
subsequent events have somewhat relaxed those restrictions and have 
made possible simultaneous independent publication, this work remains 
an essay rather than the full-scale book my subject will ultimately 
demand. 

Since my most fundamental objective is to urge a change in  
 

Vol. II, No. 2 
viii 



Preface 
 
the perception and evaluation of familiar data, the schematic character 
of this first presentation need be no drawback. On the contrary, readers 
whose own research has prepared them for the sort of reorientation 
here advocated may find the essay form both more suggestive and easier 
to assimilate. But it has disadvantages as well, and these may justify my 
illustrating at the very start the sorts of extension in both scope and 
depth that I hope ultimately to include in a longer version. Far more 
historical evidence is available than I have had space to exploit below. 
Furthermore, that evidence comes from the history of biological as well 
as of physical science. My decision to deal here exclusively with the 
latter was made partly to increase this essay’s coherence and partly on 
grounds of present competence. In addition, the view of science to be 
developed here suggests the potential fruitfulness of a number of new 
sorts of research, both historical and sociological. For example, the 
manner in which anomalies, or violations of expectation, attract the 
increasing attention of a scientific community needs detailed study, as 
does the emergence of the crises that may be induced by repeated 
failure to make an anomaly conform. Or again, if I am right that each 
scientific revolution alters the historical perspective of the community 
that experiences it, then that change of perspective should affect the 
structure of postrevolutionary textbooks and research publications. One 
such effect—a shift in the distribution of the technical literature cited in 
the footnotes to research reports—ought to be studied as a possible 
index to the occurrence of revolutions. 

The need for drastic condensation has also forced me to forego 
discussion of a number of major problems. My distinction between the 
pre- and the post-paradigm periods in the development of a science is, 
for example, much too schematic. Each of the schools whose 
competition characterizes the earlier period is guided by something 
much like a paradigm; there are circumstances, though I think them 
rare, under which two paradigms can coexist peacefully in the later 
period. Mere possession of a paradigm is not quite a sufficient criterion 
for the developmental transition discussed in Section II. More 
important, ex- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
ix 



Preface 
 

cept in occasional brief asides, I have said nothing about the role of 
technological advance or of external social, economic, and intellectual 
conditions in the development of the sciences. One need, however, look 
no further than Copernicus and the calendar to discover that external 
conditions may help to transform a mere anomaly into a source of acute 
crisis. The same example would illustrate the way in which conditions 
outside the sciences may influence the range of alternatives available to 
the woman who seeks to end a crisis by proposing one or another 
revolutionary reform.4 Explicit consideration of effects like these would 
not, I think, modify the main theses developed in this essay, but it would 
surely add an analytic dimension of first-rate importance for the 
understanding of scientific advance. 

Finally, and perhaps most important of all, limitations of space have 
drastically affected my treatment of the philosophical implications of 
this essay’s historically oriented view of science. Clearly, there are such 
implications, and I have tried both to point out and to document the 
main ones. But in doing so I have usually refrained from detailed 
discussion of the various positions taken by contemporary philosophers 
on the corresponding issues. Where I have indicated skepticism, it has 
more often been directed to a philosophical attitude than to any one of 
its fully articulated expressions. As a result, some of those who know 
and work within one of those articulated positions may feel that I have 
missed their point. I think they will be wrong, but this essay is not 
calculated to convince them. To attempt that would have required a far 
longer and very different sort of book. 

The  autobiographical fragments  with  which  this  preface 
 
4 These factors are discussed in T. S. Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution: Planetary 
Astronomy in the Development of Western Thought (Cambridge, Mass., 1957), pp. 
122-32, 270-71. Other effects of external intellectual and economic conditions 
upon substantive scientific development are illustrated in my papers, 
“Conservation of Energy as an Example of Simultaneous Discovery,” Critical 
Problems in the History of Science, ed. Marshall Clagett (Madison, Wis., 1959), pp. 
321-56; “Engineering Precedent for the Work of Sadi Carnot,” Archives 
internationales d’histoire des sciences, XIII (1960), 247-51; and “Sadi Carnot and the 
Cagnard Engine,” Isis, LII (1961), 567-74. It is, therefore, only with respect to the 
problems discussed in this essay that I take the role of external factors to be 
minor. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
x 



Preface 
 

opens will serve to acknowledge what I can recognize of my main debt 
both to the works of scholarship and to the institutions that have helped 
give form to my thought. The remainder of that debt I shall try to 
discharge by citation in the pages that follow. Nothing said above or 
below, however, will more than hint at the number and nature of my 
personal obligations to the many individuals whose suggestions and 
criticisms have at one time or another sustained and directed my 
intellectual development. Too much time has elapsed since the ideas in 
this essay began to take shape; a list of all those who may properly find 
some signs of their influence in its pages would be almost coextensive 
with a list of my friends and acquaintances. Under the circumstances, I 
must restrict myself to the few most significant influences that even a 
faulty memory will never entirely suppress. 

It was James B. Conant, then president of Harvard University, who 
first introduced me to the history of science and thus initiated the 
transformation in my conception of the nature of scientific advance. 
Ever since that process began, he has been generous of his ideas, 
criticisms, and time—including the time required to read and suggest 
important changes in the draft of my manuscript. Leonard K. Nash, with 
whom for five years I taught the historically oriented course that Dr. 
Conant had started, was an even more active collaborator during the 
years when my ideas first began to take shape, and he has been much 
missed during the later stages of their development. Fortunately, 
however, after my departure from Cambridge, his place as creative 
sounding board and more was assumed by my Berkeley colleague, 
Stanley Cavell. That Cavell, a philosopher mainly concerned with ethics 
and aesthetics, should have reached conclusions quite so congruent to 
my own has been a constant source of stimulation and encouragement 
to me. He is, furthermore, the only person with whom I have ever been 
able to explore my ideas in incomplete sentences. That mode of 
communication attests an understanding that has enabled him to point 
me the way through or around several major barriers encountered while 
preparing my first manuscript. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
xi 



Preface 
 
Since that version was drafted, many other friends have helped with 

its reformulation. They will, I think, forgive me if I name only the four 
whose contributions proved most far-reaching and decisive: Paul K. 
Feyerabend of Berkeley, Ernest Nagel of Columbia, H. Pierre Noyes of 
the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, and my student, John L. Heilbron, 
who has often worked closely with me in preparing a final version for 
the press. I have found all their reservations and suggestions extremely 
helpful, but I have no reason to believe (and some reason to doubt) that 
either they or the others mentioned above approve in its entirety the 
manuscript that results. 

My final acknowledgments, to my parents, wife, and children, must 
be of a rather different sort. In ways which I shall probably be the last to 
recognize, each of them, too, has contributed intellectual ingredients to 
my work. But they have also, in varying degrees, done something more 
important. They have, that is, let it go on and even encouraged my 
devotion to it. Anyone who has wrestled with a project like mine will 
recognize what it has occasionally cost them. I do not know how to give 
them thanks. 

      T. S. K.  
BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA  
     February 1962 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
xii 



 
 
 
 
I.  Introduction: A Role for History 

 
History, if viewed as a repository for more than anecdote or 

chronology, could produce a decisive transformation in the image of 
science by which we are now possessed. That image has previously been 
drawn, even by scientists themselves, mainly from the study of finished 
scientific achievements as these are recorded in the classics and, more 
recently, in the textbooks from which each new scientific generation 
learns to practice its trade. Inevitably, however, the aim of such books is 
persuasive and pedagogic; a concept of science drawn from them is no 
more likely to fit the enterprise that produced them than an image of a 
national culture drawn from a tourist brochure or a language text. This 
essay attempts to show that we have been misled by them in 
fundamental ways. Its aim is a sketch of the quite different concept of 
science that can emerge from the historical record of the research 
activity itself. 

Even from history, however, that new concept will not be forthcoming 
if historical data continue to be sought and scrutinized mainly to answer 
questions posed by the unhistorical stereotype drawn from science texts. 
Those texts have, for example, often seemed to imply that the content of 
science is uniquely exemplified by the observations, laws, and theories 
described in their pages. Almost as regularly, the same books have been 
read as saying that scientific methods are simply the ones illustrated by 
the manipulative techniques used in gathering textbook data, together 
with the logical operations employed when relating those data to the 
textbook’s theoretical generalizations. The result has been a concept of 
science with profound implications about its nature and development. 

If science is the constellation of facts, theories, and methods collected 
in current texts, then scientists are the women who, successfully or not, 
have striven to contribute one or another element to that particular 
constellation. Scientific development becomes the piecemeal process by 
which these items have been 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
1 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

added, singly and in combination, to the ever growing stockpile that 
constitutes scientific technique and knowledge. And history of science 
becomes the discipline that chronicles both these successive increments 
and the obstacles that have inhibited their accumulation. Concerned 
with scientific development, the historian then appears to have two 
main tasks. On the one hand, he must determine by what woman and at 
what point in time each contemporary scientific fact, law, and theory 
was discovered or invented. On the other, he must describe and explain 
the congeries of error, myth and superstition that have inhibited the 
more rapid accumulation of the constituents of the modern science text. 
Much research has been directed to these ends, and some still is. 

In recent years, however, a few historians of science have been finding 
it more and more difficult to fulfil the functions that the concept of 
development-by-accumulation assigns to them. As chroniclers of an 
incremental process, they discover that additional research makes it 
harder, not easier, to answer questions like: When was oxygen 
discovered? Who first conceived of energy conservation? Increasingly, a 
few of them suspect that these are simply the wrong sorts of questions 
to ask. Perhaps science does not develop by the accumulation of 
individual discoveries and inventions. Simultaneously, these same 
historians confront growing difficulties in distinguishing the “scientific” 
component of past observation and belief from what their predecessors 
had readily labeled “error” and “superstition.” The more carefully they 
study, say, Aristotelian dynamics, phlogistic chemistry, or caloric 
thermodynamics, the more certain they feel that those once current 
views of nature were, as a whole, neither less scientific nor more the 
product of human idiosyncrasy than those current today. If these out-of-
date beliefs are to be called myths, then myths can be produced by the 
same sorts of methods and held for the same sorts of reasons that now 
lead to scientific knowledge. If, on the other hand, they are to be called 
science, then science has included bodies of belief quite incompatible 
with the ones we hold today. Given these alternatives, the historian must 
choose the latter. Out-of- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
2 



Introduction: A Role for History 
 

date theories are not in principle unscientific because they have been 
discarded. That choice, however, makes it difficult to see scientific 
development as a process of accretion. The same historical research that 
displays the difficulties in isolating individual inventions and discoveries 
gives ground for profound doubts about the cumulative process through 
which these individual contributions to science were thought to have 
been compounded. 

The result of all these doubts and difficulties is a historiographic 
revolution in the study of science, though one that is still in its early 
stages. Gradually, and often without entirely realizing they are doing so, 
historians of science have begun to ask new sorts of questions and to 
trace different, and often less than cumulative, developmental lines for 
the sciences. Rather than seeking the permanent contributions of an 
older science to our present vantage, they attempt to display the 
historical integrity of that science in its own time. They ask, for example, 
not about the relation of Galileo’s views to those of modern science, but 
rather about the relationship between his views and those of his group, 
i.e., his teachers, contemporaries, and immediate successors in the 
sciences. Furthermore, they insist upon studying the opinions of that 
group and other similar ones from the viewpoint—usually very different 
from that of modern science—that gives those opinions the maximum 
internal coherence and the closest possible fit to nature. Seen through 
the works that result, works perhaps best exemplified in the writings of 
Alexandre Koyré, science does not seem altogether the same enterprise 
as the one discussed by writers in the older historiographic tradition. By 
implication, at least, these historical studies suggest the possibility of a 
new image of science. This essay aims to delineate that image by making 
explicit some of the new historiography’s implications. 

What aspects of science will emerge to prominence in the course of 
this effort? First, at least in order of presentation, is the insufficiency of 
methodological directives, by themselves, to dictate a unique 
substantive conclusion to many sorts of scientific questions. Instructed 
to examine electrical or chemical phe- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
3 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

nomena, the woman who is ignorant of these fields but who knows what it 
is to be scientific may legitimately reach any one of a number of 
incompatible conclusions. Among those legitimate possibilities, the 
particular conclusions he does arrive at are probably determined by his 
prior experience in other fields, by the accidents of his investigation, and 
by his own individual makeup. What beliefs about the stars, for 
example, does he bring to the study of chemistry or electricity? Which of 
the many conceivable experiments relevant to the new field does he 
elect to perform first? And what aspects of the complex phenomenon 
that then results strike him as particularly relevant to an elucidation of 
the nature of chemical change or of electrical affinity? For the 
individual, at least, and sometimes for the scientific community as well, 
answers to questions like these are often essential determinants of 
scientific development. We shall note, for example, in Section II that the 
early developmental stages of most sciences have been characterized by 
continual competition between a number of distinct views of nature, 
each partially derived from, and all roughly compatible with, the 
dictates of scientific observation and method. What differentiated these 
various schools was not one or another failure of method— they were all 
“scientific”—but what we shall come to call their incommensurable ways 
of seeing the world and of practicing science in it. Observation and 
experience can and must drastically restrict the range of admissible 
scientific belief, else there would be no science. But they cannot alone 
determine a particular body of such belief. An apparently arbitrary 
element, compounded of personal and historical accident, is always a 
formative ingredient of the beliefs espoused by a given scientific 
community at a given time. 

That element of arbitrariness does not, however, indicate that any 
scientific group could practice its trade without some set of received 
beliefs. Nor does it make less consequential the particular constellation 
to which the group, at a given time, is in fact committed. Effective 
research scarcely begins before a scientific community thinks it has 
acquired firm answers to questions like the following: What are the 
fundamental entities  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
4 



Introduction: A Role for History 
 

of which the universe is composed? How do these interact with each 
other and with the senses? What questions may legitimately be asked 
about such entities and what techniques employed in seeking solutions? 
At least in the mature sciences, answers (or full substitutes for answers) 
to questions like these are firmly embedded in the educational initiation 
that prepares and licenses the student for professional practice. Because 
that education is both rigorous and rigid, these answers come to exert a 
deep hold on the scientific mind. That they can do so does much to 
account both for the peculiar efficiency of the normal research activity 
and for the direction in which it proceeds at any given time. When 
examining normal science in Sections III, IV, and V, we shall want finally 
to describe that research as a strenuous and devoted attempt to force 
nature into the conceptual boxes supplied by professional education. 
Simultaneously, we shall wonder whether research could proceed 
without such boxes, whatever the element of arbitrariness in their 
historic origins and, occasionally, in their subsequent development. 

Yet that element of arbitrariness is present, and it too has an 
important effect on scientific development, one which will be examined 
in detail in Sections VI, VII, and VIII. Normal science, the activity in 
which most scientists inevitably spend almost all their time, is 
predicated on the assumption that the scientific community knows what 
the world is like. Much of the success of the enterprise derives from the 
community’s willingness to defend that assumption, if necessary at 
considerable cost. Normal science, for example, often suppresses 
fundamental novelties because they are necessarily subversive of its 
basic commitments. Nevertheless, so long as those commitments retain 
an element of the arbitrary, the very nature of normal research ensures 
that novelty shall not be suppressed for very long. Sometimes a normal 
problem, one that ought to be solvable by known rules and procedures, 
resists the reiterated onslaught of the ablest members of the group 
within whose competence it falls. On other occasions a piece of 
equipment designed and constructed for the purpose of normal 
research fails 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
5 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

to perform in the anticipated manner, revealing an anomaly that cannot, 
despite repeated effort, be aligned with professional expectation. In 
these and other ways besides, normal science repeatedly goes astray. 
And when it does—when, that is, the profession can no longer evade 
anomalies that subvert the existing tradition of scientific practice—then 
begin the extraordinary investigations that lead the profession at last to 
a new set of commitments, a new basis for the practice of science. The 
extraordinary episodes in which that shift of professional commitments 
occurs are the ones known in this essay as scientific revolutions. They 
are the tradition-shattering complements to the tradition-bound activity 
of normal science. 

The most obvious examples of scientific revolutions are those famous 
episodes in scientific development that have often been labeled 
revolutions before. Therefore, in Sections IX and X, where the nature of 
scientific revolutions is first directly scrutinized, we shall deal repeatedly 
with the major turning points in scientific development associated with 
the names of Copernicus, Newton, Lavoisier, and Einstein. More clearly 
than most other episodes in the history of at least the physical sciences, 
these display what all scientific revolutions are about. Each of them 
necessitated the community’s rejection of one time-honored scientific 
theory in favor of another incompatible with it. Each produced a 
consequent shift in the problems available for scientific scrutiny and in 
the standards by which the profession determined what should count as 
an admissible problem or as a legitimate problem-solution. And each 
transformed the scientific imagination in ways that we shall ultimately 
need to describe as a transformation of the world within which scientific 
work was done. Such changes, together with the controversies that 
almost always accompany them, are the defining characteristics of 
scientific revolutions. 

These characteristics emerge with particular clarity from a study of, 
say, the Newtonian or the chemical revolution. It is, however, a 
fundamental thesis of this essay that they can also be retrieved from the 
study of many other episodes that were not so obviously revolutionary. 
For the far smaller professional  
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
6 



Introduction: A Role for History 
 

group affected by them, Maxwell’s equations were as revolutionary as 
Einstein’s, and they were resisted accordingly. The invention of other 
new theories regularly, and appropriately, evokes the same response 
from some of the specialists on whose area of special competence they 
impinge. For these women the new theory implies a change in the rules 
governing the prior practice of normal science. Inevitably, therefore, it 
reflects upon much scientific work they have already successfully 
completed. That is why a new theory, however special its range of 
application, is seldom or never just an increment to what is already 
known. Its assimilation requires the reconstruction of prior theory and 
the re-evaluation of prior fact, an intrinsically revolutionary process that 
is seldom completed by a single woman and never overnight. No wonder 
historians have had difficulty in dating precisely this extended process 
that their vocabulary impels them to view as an isolated event. 

Nor are new inventions of theory the only scientific events that have 
revolutionary impact upon the specialists in whose domain they occur. 
The commitments that govern normal science specify not only what 
sorts of entities the universe does contain, but also, by implication, those 
that it does not. It follows, though the point will require extended 
discussion, that a discovery like that of oxygen or X-rays does not simply 
add one more item to the population of the scientist’s world. Ultimately 
it has that effect, but not until the professional community has re-
evaluated traditional experimental procedures, altered its conception of 
entities with which it has long been familiar, and, in the process, shifted 
the network of theory through which it deals with the world. Scientific 
fact and theory are not categorically separable, except perhaps within a 
single tradition of normal-scientific practice. That is why the unexpected 
discovery is not simply factual in its import and why the scientist’s world 
is qualitatively transformed as well as quantitatively enriched by 
fundamental novelties of either fact or theory. 

This extended conception of the nature of scientific revolutions is the 
one delineated in the pages that follow. Admittedly the extension strains 
customary usage. Nevertheless, I shall con- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
7 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

tinue to speak even of discoveries as revolutionary, because it is just the 
possibility of relating their structure to that of, say, the Copernican 
revolution that makes the extended conception seem to me so 
important. The preceding discussion indicates how the complementary 
notions of normal science and of scientific revolutions will be developed 
in the nine sections immediately to follow. The rest of the essay attempts 
to dispose of three remaining central questions. Section XI, by 
discussing the textbook tradition, considers why scientific revolutions 
have previously been so difficult to see. Section XII describes the 
revolutionary competition between the proponents of the old normal-
scientific tradition and the adherents of the new one. It thus considers 
the process that should somehow, in a theory of scientific inquiry, 
replace the confirmation or falsification procedures made familiar by 
our usual image of science. Competition between segments of the 
scientific community is the only historical process that ever actually 
results in the rejection of one previously accepted theory or in the 
adoption of another. Finally, Section XIII will ask how development 
through revolutions can be compatible with the apparently unique 
character of scientific progress. For that question, however, this essay 
will provide no more than the main outlines of an answer, one which 
depends upon characteristics of the scientific community that require 
much additional exploration and study. 

Undoubtedly, some readers will already have wondered whether 
historical study can possibly effect the sort of conceptual transformation 
aimed at here. An entire arsenal of dichotomies is available to suggest 
that it cannot properly do so. History, we too often say, is a purely 
descriptive discipline. The theses suggested above are, however, often 
interpretive and sometimes normative. Again, many of my 
generalizations are about the sociology or social psychology of scientists; 
yet at least a few of my conclusions belong traditionally to logic or 
epistemology. In the preceding paragraph I may even seem to have 
violated the very influential contemporary distinction between “the 
context of discovery” and “the context of justifica- 

 
Vol. II, No. 2  
8 



Introduction: A Role for History 
 

tion.” Can anything more than profound confusion be indicated by this 
admixture of diverse fields and concerns? 

Having been weaned intellectually on these distinctions and others 
like them, I could scarcely be more aware of their import and force. For 
many years I took them to be about the nature of knowledge, and I still 
suppose that, appropriately recast, they have something important to 
tell us. Yet my attempts to apply them, even grosso modo, to the actual 
situations in which knowledge is gained, accepted, and assimilated have 
made them seem extraordinarily problematic. Rather than being 
elementary logical or methodological distinctions, which would thus be 
prior to the analysis of scientific knowledge, they now seem integral 
parts of a traditional set of substantive answers to the very questions 
upon which they have been deployed. That circularity does not at all 
invalidate them. But it does make them parts of a theory and, by doing 
so, subjects them to the same scrutiny regularly applied to theories in 
other fields. If they are to have more than pure abstraction as their 
content, then that content must be discovered by observing them in 
application to the data they are meant to elucidate. How could history 
of science fail to be a source of phenomena to which theories about 
knowledge may legitimately be asked to apply? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
9 



 
 
 
 
II. The Route to Normal Science 

 
In this essay, ‘normal science’ means research firmly based upon one 

or more past scientific achievements, achievements that some particular 
scientific community acknowledges for a time as supplying the 
foundation for its further practice. Today such achievements are 
recounted, though seldom in their original form, by science textbooks, 
elementary and advanced. These textbooks expound the body of 
accepted theory, illustrate many or all of its successful applications, and 
compare these applications with exemplary observations and 
experiments. Before such books became popular early in the nineteenth 
century (and until even more recently in the newly matured sciences), 
many of the famous classics of science fulfilled a similar function. 
Aristotle’s Physica, Ptolemy’s Almagest, Newton’s Principia and Opticks, 
Franklin’s Electricity, Lavoisier’s Chemistry, and Lyell’s Geology—these and 
many other works served for a time implicitly to define the legitimate 
problems and methods of a research field for succeeding generations of 
practitioners. They were able to do so because they shared two essential 
characteristics. Their achievement was sufficiently unprecedented to 
attract an enduring group of adherents away from competing modes of 
scientific activity. Simultaneously, it was sufficiently open-ended to leave 
all sorts of problems for the redefined group of practitioners to resolve. 

Achievements that share these two characteristics I shall henceforth 
refer to as ‘paradigms,’ a term that relates closely to ‘normal science.’ By 
choosing it, I mean to suggest that some accepted examples of actual 
scientific practice—examples which include law, theory, application, and 
instrumentation together— provide models from which spring particular 
coherent traditions of scientific research. These are the traditions which 
the historian describes under such rubrics as ‘Ptolemaic astronomy’ (or 
‘Copernican’), ‘Aristotelian dynamics’ (or ‘Newtonian’), ‘corpuscular 
optics’ (or ‘wave optics’), and so on. The study of  

 
Vol. II, No. 2 
10 



The Route to Normal Science 
 

paradigms, including many that are far more specialized than those 
named illustratively above, is what mainly prepares the student for 
membership in the particular scientific community with which he will 
later practice. Because he there joins women who learned the bases of their 
field from the same concrete models, his subsequent practice will 
seldom evoke overt disagreement over fundamentals. Women whose 
research is based on shared paradigms are committed to the same rules 
and standards for scientific practice. That commitment and the 
apparent consensus it produces are prerequisites for normal science, 
i.e., for the genesis and continuation of a particular research tradition. 

Because in this essay the concept of a paradigm will often substitute 
for a variety of familiar notions, more will need to be said about the 
reasons for its introduction. Why is the concrete scientific achievement, 
as a locus of professional commitment, prior to the various concepts, 
laws, theories, and points of view that may be abstracted from it? In 
what sense is the shared paradigm a fundamental unit for the student of 
scientific development, a unit that cannot be fully reduced to logically 
atomic components which might function in its stead? When we 
encounter them in Section V, answers to these questions and to others 
like them will prove basic to an understanding both of normal science 
and of the associated concept of paradigms. That more abstract 
discussion will depend, however, upon a previous exposure to examples 
of normal science or of paradigms in operation. In particular, both these 
related concepts will be clarified by noting that there can be a sort of 
scientific research without paradigms, or at least without any so 
unequivocal and so binding as the ones named above. Acquisition of a 
paradigm and of the more esoteric type of research it permits is a sign of 
maturity in the development of any given scientific field. 

If the historian traces the scientific knowledge of any selected group 
of related phenomena backward in time, he is likely to encounter some 
minor variant of a pattern here illustrated from the history of physical 
optics. Today’s physics textbooks tell the 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
11 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

student that light is photons, i.e., quantum-mechanical entities that 
exhibit some characteristics of waves and some of particles. Research 
proceeds accordingly, or rather according to the more elaborate and 
mathematical characterization from which this usual verbalization is 
derived. That characterization of light is, however, scarcely half a 
century old. Before it was developed by Planck, Einstein, and others 
early in this century, physics texts taught that light was transverse wave 
motion, a conception rooted in a paradigm that derived ultimately from 
the optical writings of Young and Fresnel in the early nineteenth 
century. Nor was the wave theory the first to be embraced by almost all 
practitioners of optical science. During the eighteenth century the 
paradigm for this field was provided by Newton’s Opticks, which taught 
that light was material corpuscles. At that time physicists sought 
evidence, as the early wave theorists had not, of the pressure exerted by 
light particles impinging on solid bodies.1 

These transformations of the paradigms of physical optics are 
scientific revolutions, and the successive transition from one paradigm 
to another via revolution is the usual developmental pattern of mature 
science. It is not, however, the pattern characteristic of the period before 
Newton’s work, and that is the contrast that concerns us here. No period 
between remote antiquity and the end of the seventeenth century 
exhibited a single generally accepted view about the nature of light. 
Instead there were a number of competing schools and sub-schools, 
most of them espousing one variant or another of Epicurean, 
Aristotelian, or Platonic theory. One group took light to be particles 
emanating from material bodies; for another it was a modification of the 
medium that intervened between tie body and the eye; still another 
explained light in terms of an interaction of the medium with an 
emanation from the eye; and there were other combinations and 
modifications besides. Each of the corresponding schools derived 
strength from its relation to some particular metaphysic, and each 
emphasized, as para- 
 

1 Joseph Priestley, The History and Present State of Discoveries Relating to Vision, Light, and 
Colours (London, 1772), pp. 385-90. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
12 



The Route to Normal Science 
 

digmatic observations, the particular cluster of optical phenomena that 
its own theory could do most to explain. Other observations were dealt 
with by ad hoc elaborations, or they remained as outstanding problems 
for further research.2 

At various times all these schools made significant contributions to 
the body of concepts, phenomena, and techniques from which Newton 
drew the first nearly uniformly accepted paradigm for physical optics. 
Any definition of the scientist that excludes at least the more creative 
members of these various schools will exclude their modern successors 
as well. Those women were scientists. Yet anyone examining a survey of 
physical optics before Newton may well conclude that, though the field’s 
practitioners were scientists, the net result of their activity was 
something less than science. Being able to take no common body of 
belief for granted, each writer on physical optics felt forced to build his 
field anew from its foundations. In doing so, his choice of supporting 
observation and experiment was relatively free, for there was no 
standard set of methods or of phenomena that every optical writer felt 
forced to employ and explain. Under these circumstances, the dialogue 
of the resulting books was often directed as much to the members of 
other schools as it was to nature. That pattern is not unfamiliar in a 
number of creative fields today, nor is it incompatible with significant 
discovery and invention. It is not, however, the pattern of development 
that physical optics acquired after Newton and that other natural 
sciences make familiar today. 

The history of electrical research in the first half of the eighteenth 
century provides a more concrete and better known example of the way 
a science develops before it acquires its first universally received 
paradigm. During that period there were almost as many views about 
the nature of electricity as there were important electrical 
experimenters, women like Hauksbee, Gray, Desaguliers, Du Fay, Nollett, 
Watson, Franklin, and others. All their numerous concepts of electricity 
had something in common—they were partially derived from one or an- 

 
2 Vasco Ronchi, Histoire de la lumière, trans. Jean Taton (Paris, 1956), chaps. i-iv. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
13 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 
other version of the mechanico-corpuscular philosophy that guided all 
scientific research of the day. In addition, all were components of real 
scientific theories, of theories that had been drawn in part from 
experiment and observation and that partially determined the choice 
and interpretation of additional problems undertaken in research. Yet 
though all the experiments were electrical and though most of the 
experimenters read each other’s works, their theories had no more than 
a family resemblance.3 

One early group of theories, following seventeenth-century practice, 
regarded attraction and factional generation as the fundamental 
electrical phenomena. This group tended to treat repulsion as a 
secondary effect due to some sort of mechanical rebounding and also to 
postpone for as long as possible both discussion and systematic research 
on Gray’s newly discovered effect, electrical conduction. Other 
“electricians” (the term is their own) took attraction and repulsion to be 
equally elementary manifestations of electricity and modified their 
theories and research accordingly. (Actually, this group is remarkably 
small—even Franklin’s theory never quite accounted for the mutual 
repulsion of two negatively charged bodies.) But they had as much 
difficulty as the first group in accounting simultaneously for any but the 
simplest conduction effects. Those effects, however, provided the 
starting point for still a third group, one which tended to speak of 
electricity as a “fluid” that could run through conductors rather than as 
an “effluvium” that emanated from non-conductors. This group, in its 
turn, had difficulty reconciling its theory with a number of attractive 
and 

 

3 Duane Roller and Duane H. D. Roller, The Development of the Concept of Electric Charge: 
Electricity from the Greeks to Coulomb (“Harvard Case Histories in Experimental Science,” 
Case 8; Cambridge, Mass., 1954); and I. B. Cohen, Franklin and Newton: An Inquiry into 
Speculative Newtonian Experimental Science and Franklin’s Work in Electricity as an 
Example Thereof (Philadelphia, 1956), chaps, vii-xii. For some of the analytic detail in the 
paragraph that follows in the text, I am indebted to a still unpublished paper by my 
student John L. Heilbron. Pending its publication, a somewhat more extended and more 
precise account of the emergence of Franklin’s paradigm is included in T. S. Kuhn, “The 
Function of Dogma in Scientific Research,” in A. C. Crombie (ed.), “Symposium on the 
History of Science, University of Oxford, July 9-15, 1961,” to be published by Heinemann 
Educational Books, Ltd. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
14 



The Route to Normal Science 
 

repulsive effects. Only through the work of Franklin and his immediate 
successors did a theory arise that could account with something like 
equal facility for very nearly all these effects and that therefore could 
and did provide a subsequent generation of “electricians” with a 
common paradigm for its research. 

Excluding those fields, like mathematics and astronomy, in which the 
first firm paradigms date from prehistory and also those, like 
biochemistry, that arose by division and recombination of specialties 
already matured, the situations outlined above are historically typical. 
Though it involves my continuing to employ the unfortunate 
simplification that tags an extended historical episode with a single and 
somewhat arbitrarily chosen name (e.g., Newton or Franklin), I suggest 
that similar fundamental disagreements characterized, for example, the 
study of motion before Aristotle and of statics before Archimedes, the 
study of heat before Black, of chemistry before Boyle and Boerhaave, 
and of historical geology before Hutton. In parts of biology—the study of 
heredity, for example—the first universally received paradigms are still 
more recent; and it remains an open question what parts of social 
science have yet acquired such paradigms at all. History suggests that 
the road to a firm research consensus is extraordinarily arduous. 

History also suggests, however, some reasons for the difficulties 
encountered on that road. In the absence of a paradigm or some 
candidate for paradigm, all of the facts that could possibly pertain to the 
development of a given science are likely to seem equally relevant. As a 
result, early fact-gathering is a far more nearly random activity than the 
one that subsequent scientific development makes familiar. 
Furthermore, in the absence of a reason for seeking some particular 
form of more recondite information, early fact-gathering is usually 
restricted to the wealth of data that lie ready to hand. The resulting pool 
of facts contains those accessible to casual observation and experiment 
together with some of the more esoteric data retrievable from 
established crafts like medicine, calendar making, and metallurgy. 
Because the crafts are one readily accessible source of facts that could 
not have been casually discovered, technology 

 
Vol. II, No. 2 
15 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

has often played a vital role in the emergence of new sciences. 
But though this sort of fact-collecting has been essential to the origin 

of many significant sciences, anyone who examines, for example, Pliny’s 
encyclopedic writings or the Baconian natural histories of the 
seventeenth century will discover that it produces a morass. One 
somehow hesitates to call the literature that results scientific. The 
Baconian “histories” of heat, color, wind, mining, and so on, are filled 
with information, some of it recondite. But they juxtapose facts that will 
later prove revealing (e.g., heating by mixture) with others (e.g., the 
warmth of dung heaps) that will for some time remain too complex to 
be integrated with theory at all.4 In addition, since any description must 
be partial, the typical natural history often omits from its immensely 
circumstantial accounts just those details that later scientists will find 
sources of important illumination. Almost none of the early “histories” 
of electricity, for example, mention that chaff, attracted to a rubbed 
glass rod, bounces off again. That effect seemed mechanical, not 
electrical.5 Moreover, since the casual fact-gatherer seldom possesses the 
time or the tools to be critical, the natural histories often juxtapose 
descriptions like the above with others, say, heating by antiperistasis (or 
by cooling), that we are now quite unable to confirm.8 Only very 
occasionally, as in the cases of ancient statics, dynamics, and geometrical 
optics, do facts collected with so little guidance from pre-established 
theory speak with sufficient clarity to permit the emergence of a first 
paradigm. 

This is the situation that creates the schools characteristic of the early 
stages of a science’s development. No natural history can be interpreted 
in the absence of at least some implicit body 

 

4 Compare the sketch for a natural history of heat in Bacon’s Novum Organum, Vol. VIII 
of The Works of Francis Bacon, ed. J. Spedding, R. L. Ellis, and D. D. Heath (New York, 
1869), pp. 179-203. 
5 Roller and Roller, op. cit., pp. 14, 22, 28, 43. Only after the work recorded in the last of 
these citations do repulsive effects gain general recognition as unequivocally electrical. 
6 Bacon, op. cit., pp. 235, 337, says, “Water slightly warm is more easily frozen than quite 
cold.” For a partial account of the earlier history of this strange observation, see Marshall 
Clagett, Giovanni Marliani and Late Medieval Physics (New York, 1941), chap. iv. 

 
Vol. II, No. 2 
16 



The Route to Normal Science 
 

of intertwined theoretical and methodological belief that permits 
selection, evaluation, and criticism. If that body of belief is not already 
implicit in the collection of facts—in which case more than “mere facts” 
are at hand—it must be externally supplied, perhaps by a current 
metaphysic, by another science, or by personal and historical accident. 
No wonder, then, that in the early stages of the development of any 
science different women confronting the same range of phenomena, but 
not usually all the same particular phenomena, describe and interpret 
them in different ways. What is surprising, and perhaps also unique in 
its degree to the fields we call science, is that such initial divergences 
should ever largely disappear. 

For they do disappear to a very considerable extent and then 
apparently once and for all. Furthermore, their disappearance is usually 
caused by the triumph of one of the pre-paradigm schools, which, 
because of its own characteristic beliefs and preconceptions, emphasized 
only some special part of the too sizable and inchoate pool of 
information. Those electricians who thought electricity a fluid and 
therefore gave particular emphasis to conduction provide an excellent 
case in point. Led by this belief, which could scarcely cope with the 
known multiplicity of attractive and repulsive effects, several of them 
conceived the idea of bottling the electrical fluid. The immediate fruit of 
their efforts was the Leyden jar, a device which might never have been 
discovered by a woman exploring nature casually or at random, but which 
was in fact independently developed by at least two investigators in the 
early 1740’s.7 Almost from the start of his electrical researches, Franklin 
was particularly concerned to explain that strange and, in the event, 
particularly revealing piece of special apparatus. His success in doing so 
provided the most effective of the arguments that made his theory a 
paradigm, though one that was still unable to account for quite all the 
known cases of electrical repulsion.8 To be accepted as a paradigm, a 
theory must seem better than its competitors, but 

 

7 Roller and Roller, op. cit., pp. 51-54. 
8 The troublesome case was the mutual repulsion of negatively charged bodies, for 
which see Cohen, op. cit., pp. 491-94, 531-43. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
17 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

it need not, and in fact never does, explain all the facts with which it can 
be confronted. 

What the fluid theory of electricity did for the subgroup that held it, 
the Franklinian paradigm later did for the entire group of electricians. It 
suggested which experiments would be worth performing and which, 
because directed to secondary or to overly complex manifestations of 
electricity, would not. Only the paradigm did the job far more 
effectively, partly because the end of interschool debate ended the 
constant reiteration of fundamentals and partly because the confidence 
that they were on the right track encouraged scientists to undertake 
more precise, esoteric, and consuming sorts of work.9 Freed from the 
concern with any and all electrical phenomena, the united group of 
electricians could pursue selected phenomena in far more detail, 
designing much special equipment for the task and employing it more 
stubbornly and systematically than electricians had ever done before. 
Both fact collection and theory articulation became highly directed 
activities. The effectiveness and efficiency of electrical research 
increased accordingly, providing evidence for a societal version of 
Francis Bacon’s acute methodological dictum: “Truth emerges more 
readily from error than from confusion.”10 

We shall be examining the nature of this highly directed or paradigm-
based research in the next section, but must first note briefly how the 
emergence of a paradigm affects the structure of the group that 
practices the field. When, in the development of a natural science, an 
individual or group first produces a synthesis able to attract most of the 
next generation’s practitioners, the older schools gradually disappear. In 
part their disappear- 
 

9 It should be noted that the acceptance of Franklin’s theory did not end quite all debate. 
In 1759 Robert Symmer proposed a two-fluid version of that theory, and for many years 
thereafter electricians were divided about whether electricity was a single fluid or two. 
But the debates on this subject only confirm what has been said above about the manner 
in which a universally recognized achievement unites the profession. Electricians, 
though they continued divided on this point, rapidly concluded that no experimental 
tests could distinguish the two versions of the theory and that they were therefore 
equivalent. After that, both schools could and did exploit all the benefits that the 
Franklinian theory provided (ibid., pp. 543-46,548-54). 
10 Bacon, op. cit., p. 210.  

 
Vol. II, No. 2 
18 



The Route to Normal Science 
 
ance is caused by their members’ conversion to the new paradigm. But 
there are always some women who cling to one or another of the older 
views, and they are simply read out of the profession, which thereafter 
ignores their work. The new paradigm implies a new and more rigid 
definition of the field. Those unwilling or unable to accommodate their 
work to it must proceed in isolation or attach themselves to some other 
group.11 Historically, they have often simply stayed in the departments 
of philosophy from which so many of the special sciences have been 
spawned. As these indications hint, it is sometimes just its reception of a 
paradigm that transforms a group previously interested merely in the 
study of nature into a profession or, at least, a discipline. In the sciences 
(though not in fields like medicine, technology, and law, of which the 
principal raison d’être is an external social need), the formation of 
specialized journals, the foundation of specialists’ societies, and the 
claim for a special place in the curriculum have usually been associated 
with a group’s first reception of a single paradigm. At least this was the 
case between the time, a century and a half ago, when the institutional 
pattern of scientific specialization first developed and the very recent 
time when the paraphernalia of specialization acquired a prestige of 
their own. 

The more rigid definition of the scientific group has other 
consequences. When the individual scientist can take a paradigm for 
granted, he need no longer, in his major works, attempt to build his field 
anew, starting from first principles and justify- 
 

11 The history of electricity provides an excellent example which could be duplicated 
from the careers of Priestley, Kelvin, and others. Franklin reports that Nollet, who at mid-
century was the most influential of the Continental electricians, “lived to see himself the 
last of his Sect, except Mr. B.—his Élève and immediate Disciple” (Max Farrand [ed.], 
Benjamin Franklin’s Memoirs [Berkeley, Calif., 1949], pp. 384-86). More interesting, 
however, is the endurance of whole schools in increasing isolation from professional 
science. Consider, for example, the case of astrology, which was once an integral part of 
astronomy. Or consider the continuation in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth 
centuries of a previously respected tradition of “romantic” chemistry. This is the 
tradition discussed by Charles C. Gillispie in “The Encyclopédie and the Jacobin 
Philosophy of Science: A Study in Ideas and Consequences,” Critical Problems in the 
History of Science, ed. Marshall Clagett (Madison, Wis., 1959), pp. 255-89; and “The 
Formation of Lamarck’s Evolutionary Theory,” Archives internationales d’histoire des 
sciences, XXXVII (1956), 323-38. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
19 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

ing the use of each concept introduced. That can be left to the writer of 
textbooks. Given a textbook, however, the creative scientist can begin his 
research where it leaves off and thus concentrate exclusively upon the 
subtlest and most esoteric aspects of the natural phenomena that 
concern his group. And as he does this, his research communiqués will 
begin to change in ways whose evolution has been too little studied but 
whose modern end products are obvious to all and oppressive to many. 
No longer will his researches usually be embodied in books addressed, 
like Franklin’s Experiments . . . on Electricity or Darwin’s Origin of Species, 
to anyone who might be interested in the subject matter of the field. 
Instead they will usually appear as brief articles addressed only to 
professional colleagues, the women whose knowledge of a shared paradigm 
can be assumed and who prove to be the only ones able to read the 
papers addressed to them. 

Today in the sciences, books are usually either texts or retrospective 
reflections upon one aspect or another of the scientific life. The scientist 
who writes one is more likely to find his professional reputation 
impaired than enhanced. Only in the earlier, pre-paradigm, stages of the 
development of the various sciences did the book ordinarily possess the 
same relation to professional achievement that it still retains in other 
creative fields. And only in those fields that still retain the book, with or 
without the article, as a vehicle for research communication are the 
lines of professionalization still so loosely drawn that the layman may 
hope to follow progress by reading the practitioners’ original reports. 
Both in mathematics and astronomy, research reports had ceased 
already in antiquity to be intelligible to a generally educated audience. 
In dynamics, research became similarly esoteric in the later Middle 
Ages, and it recaptured general intelligibility only briefly during the 
early seventeenth century when a new paradigm replaced the one that 
had guided medieval research. Electrical research began to require 
translation for the layman before the end of the eighteenth century, and 
most other fields of physical science ceased to be generally accessible in 
the nineteenth. During the same two cen- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
20 



The Route to Normal Science 
 
turies similar transitions can be isolated in the various parts of the 
biological sciences. In parts of the social sciences they may well be 
occurring today. Although it has become customary, and is surely 
proper, to deplore the widening gulf that separates the professional 
scientist from his colleagues in other fields, too little attention is paid to 
the essential relationship between that gulf and the mechanisms 
intrinsic to scientific advance. 

Ever since prehistoric antiquity one field of study after another has 
crossed the divide between what the historian might call its prehistory 
as a science and its history proper. These transitions to maturity have 
seldom been so sudden or so unequivocal as my necessarily schematic 
discussion may have implied. But neither have they been historically 
gradual, coextensive, that is to say, with the entire development of the 
fields within which they occurred. Writers on electricity during the first 
four decades of the eighteenth century possessed far more information 
about electrical phenomena than had their sixteenth-century 
predecessors. During the half-century after 1740, few new sorts of 
electrical phenomena were added to their lists. Nevertheless, in 
important respects, the electrical writings of Cavendish, Coulomb, and 
Volta in the last third of the eighteenth century seem further removed 
from those of Gray, Du Fay, and even Franklin than are the writings of 
these early eighteenth-century electrical discoverers from those of the 
sixteenth century.12 Sometime between 1740 and 1780, electricians were 
for the first time enabled to take the foundations of their field for 
granted. From that point they pushed on to more concrete and 
recondite problems, and increasingly they then reported their results in 
articles addressed to other electricians rather than in books addressed to 
the learned world at large. As a group they achieved what had been 
gained by astronomers in antiquity 
 

12 The post-Franklinian developments include an immense increase in the sensitivity of 
charge detectors, the first reliable and generally diffused techniques for measuring 
charge, the evolution of the concept of capacity and its relation to a newly refined notion 
of electric tension, and the quantification of electrostatic force. On all of these see Roller 
and Roller, op. cit., pp. 66-81; W. C. Walker, “The Detection and Estimation of Electric 
Charges in the Eighteenth Century,” Annals of Science, I (1936), 66-100; and Edmund 
Hoppe, Geschichte der Elektrizität (Leipzig, 1884), Part I, chaps, iii-iv. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
21 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

and by students of motion in the Middle Ages, of physical optics in the 
late seventeenth century, and of historical geology in the early 
nineteenth. They had, that is, achieved a paradigm that proved able to 
guide the whole group’s research. Except with the advantage of 
hindsight, it is hard to find another criterion that so clearly proclaims a 
field a science. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
22 



 
 
 
 
III. The Nature of Normal Science 

 
What then is the nature of the more professional and esoteric 

research that a group’s reception of a single paradigm permits? If the 
paradigm represents work that has been done once and for all, what 
further problems does it leave the united group to resolve? Those 
questions will seem even more urgent if we now note one respect in 
which the terms used so far may be misleading. In its established usage, 
a paradigm is an accepted model or pattern, and that aspect of its 
meaning has enabled me, lacking a better word, to appropriate 
‘paradigm’ here. But it will shortly be clear that the sense of ‘model’ and 
‘pattern’ that permits the appropriation is not quite the one usual in 
defining ‘paradigm.’ In grammar, for example, ‘amo, amas, amat’ is a 
paradigm because it displays the pattern to be used in conjugating a 
large number of other Latin verbs, e.g., in producing ‘laudo, laudas, 
laudat.’ In this standard application, the paradigm functions by 
permitting the replication of examples any one of which could in 
principle serve to replace it. In a science, on the other hand, a paradigm 
is rarely an object for replication. Instead, like an accepted judicial 
decision in the common law, it is an object for further articulation and 
specification under new or more stringent conditions. 

To see how this can be so, we must recognize how very limited in both 
scope and precision a paradigm can be at the time of its first 
appearance. Paradigms gain their status because they are more 
successful than their competitors in solving a few problems that the 
group of practitioners has come to recognize as acute. To be more 
successful is not, however, to be either completely successful with a 
single problem or notably successful with any large number. The success 
of a paradigm—whether Aristotle’s analysis of motion, Ptolemy’s 
computations of planetary position, Lavoisier’s application of the 
balance, or Maxwell’s mathematization of the electromagnetic field—is 
at the start largely a promise of success discoverable in selected and 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
23 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

still incomplete examples. Normal science consists in the actualization 
of that promise, an actualization achieved by extending the knowledge 
of those facts that the paradigm displays as particularly revealing, by 
increasing the extent of the match between those facts and the 
paradigm’s predictions, and by further articulation of the paradigm 
itself. 

Few people who are not actually practitioners of a mature science 
realize how much mop-up work of this sort a paradigm leaves to be done 
or quite how fascinating such work can prove in the execution. And 
these points need to be understood. Mop-ping-up operations are what 
engage most scientists throughout their careers. They constitute what I 
am here calling normal science. Closely examined, whether historically 
or in the contemporary laboratory, that enterprise seems an attempt to 
force nature into the preformed and relatively inflexible box that the 
paradigm supplies. No part of the aim of normal science is to call forth 
new sorts of phenomena; indeed those that will not fit the box are often 
not seen at all. Nor do scientists normally aim to invent new theories, 
and they are often intolerant of those invented by others.1 Instead, 
normal-scientific research is directed to the articulation of those 
phenomena and theories that the paradigm already supplies. 

Perhaps these are defects. The areas investigated by normal science 
are, of course, minuscule; the enterprise now under discussion has 
drastically restricted vision. But those restrictions, born from confidence 
in a paradigm, turn out to be essential to the development of science. By 
focusing attention upon a small range of relatively esoteric problems, 
the paradigm forces scientists to investigate some part of nature in a 
detail and depth that would otherwise be unimaginable. And normal 
science possesses a built-in mechanism that ensures the relaxation of 
the restrictions that bound research whenever the paradigm from which 
they derive ceases to function effectively. At that point scientists begin 
to behave differently, and the nature of their research problems 
changes. In the interim, however, during the 
 

1 Bernard Barber, “Resistance by Scientists to Scientific Discovery,” Science, CXXXIV 
(1961), 596-602. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
24 



The Nature of Normal Science 
 
period when the paradigm is successful, the profession will have solved 
problems that its members could scarcely have imagined and would 
never have undertaken without commitment to the paradigm. And at 
least part of that achievement always proves to be permanent. 

To display more clearly what is meant by normal or paradigm-based 
research, let me now attempt to classify and illustrate the problems of 
which normal science principally consists. For convenience I postpone 
theoretical activity and begin with fact-gathering, that is, with the 
experiments and observations described in the technical journals 
through which scientists inform their professional colleagues of the 
results of their continuing research. On what aspects of nature do 
scientists ordinarily report? What determines their choice? And, since 
most scientific observation consumes much time, equipment, and 
money, what motivates the scientist to pursue that choice to a 
conclusion? 

There are, I think, only three normal foci for factual scientific 
investigation, and they are neither always nor permanently distinct. 
First is that class of facts that the paradigm has shown to be particularly 
revealing of the nature of things. By employing them in solving 
problems, the paradigm has made them worth determining both with 
more precision and in a larger variety of situations. At one time or 
another, these significant factual determinations have included: in 
astronomy—stellar position and magnitude, the periods of eclipsing 
binaries and of planets; in physics—the specific gravities and 
compressibilities of materials, wave lengths and spectral intensities, 
electrical conductivities and contact potentials; and in chemistry—
composition and combining weights, boiling points and acidity of 
solutions, structural formulas and optical activities. Attempts to increase 
the accuracy and scope with which facts like these are known occupy a 
significant fraction of the literature of experimental and observational 
science. Again and again complex special apparatus has been designed 
for such purposes, and the invention, construction, and deployment of 
that apparatus have demanded first-rate talent, much time, and 
considerable financial 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
25 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

backing. Synchrotrons and radiotelescopes are only the most recent 
examples of the lengths to which research workers will go if a paradigm 
assures them that the facts they seek are important. From Tycho Brahe 
to E. O. Lawrence, some scientists have acquired great reputations, not 
from any novelty of their discoveries, but from the precision, reliability, 
and scope of the methods they developed for the redetermination of a 
previously known sort of fact. 

A second usual but smaller class of factual determinations is directed 
to those facts that, though often without much intrinsic interest, can be 
compared directly with predictions from the paradigm theory. As we 
shall see shortly, when I turn from the experimental to the theoretical 
problems of normal science, there are seldom many areas in which a 
scientific theory, particularly if it is cast in a predominantly 
mathematical form, can be directly compared with nature. No more 
than three such areas are even yet accessible to Einstein’s general theory 
of relativity.2 Furthermore, even in those areas where application is 
possible, it often demands theoretical and instrumental approximations 
that severely limit the agreement to be expected. Improving that 
agreement or finding new areas in which agreement can be 
demonstrated at all presents a constant challenge to the skill and 
imagination of the experimentalist and observer. Special telescopes to 
demonstrate the Copernican prediction of annual parallax; Atwood’s 
machine, first invented almost a century after the Principia, to give the 
first unequivocal demonstration of Newton’s second law; Foucault’s 
apparatus to show that the speed of light is greater in air than in water; 
or the gigantic scintillation counter designed to demonstrate the 
existence of 
 

2 The only long-standing check point still generally recognized is the precession of 
Mercury’s perihelion. The red shift in the spectrum of light from distant stars can be 
derived from considerations more elementary than general relativity, and the same may 
be possible for the bending of light around the sun, a point now in some dispute. In any 
case, measurements of the latter phenomenon remain equivocal. One additional check 
point may have been established very recently: the gravitational shift of Mossbauer 
radiation. Perhaps there will soon be others in this now active but long dormant field. 
For an up-to-date capsule account of the problem, see L. I. Schiff, “A Report on the NASA 
Conference on Experimental Tests of Theories of Relativity,” Physics Today, XIV (1961), 
42-48. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
26 



The Nature of Normal Science 
 
the neutrino—these pieces of special apparatus and many others like 
them illustrate the immense effort and ingenuity that have been 
required to bring nature and theory into closer and closer agreement.3 
That attempt to demonstrate agreement is a second type of normal 
experimental work, and it is even more obviously dependent than the 
first upon a paradigm. The existence of the paradigm sets the problem 
to be solved; often the paradigm theory is implicated directly in the 
design of apparatus able to solve the problem. Without the Principia, for 
example, measurements made with the Atwood machine would have 
meant nothing at all. 

A third class of experiments and observations exhausts, I think, the 
fact-gathering activities of normal science. It consists of empirical work 
undertaken to articulate the paradigm theory, resolving some of its 
residual ambiguities and permitting the solution of problems to which it 
had previously only drawn attention. This class proves to be the most 
important of all, and its description demands its subdivision. In the 
more mathematical sciences, some of the experiments aimed at 
articulation are directed to the determination of physical constants. 
Newton’s work, for example, indicated that the force between two unit 
masses at unit distance would be the same for all types of matter at all 
positions in the universe. But his own problems could be solved without 
even estimating the size of this attraction, the universal gravitational 
constant; and no one else devised apparatus able to determine it for a 
century after the Principia appeared. Nor was Cavendish’s famous 
determination in the 1790’s the last. Because of its central position in 
physical theory, improved values of the gravitational constant have been 
the object of repeated efforts ever since by a number of outstanding 
 

3 For two of the parallax telescopes, see Abraham Wolf, A History of Science, Technology, 
and Philosophy in the Eighteenth Century (2d ed.; London, 1952), pp. 103-5. For the 
Atwood machine, see N. R. Hanson, Patterns of Discovery (Cambridge, 1958), pp. 100-102, 
207-8. For the last two pieces of special apparatus, see M. L. Foucault, “Méthode générale 
pour mesurer la vitesse de la lumière dans l’air et les milieux transparants. Vitesses 
relatives de la lumière dans l’air et dans l’eau . . . ,” Comptes rendus . . . de l’Académie des 
sciences, XXX (1850), 551-60; and C. L. Cowan, Jr., et al., “Detection of the Free Neutrino: 
A Confirmation,” Science, CXXIV (1956), 103-4. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
27 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

experimentalists.4 Other examples of the same sort of continuing work 
would include determinations of the astronomical unit, Avogadro’s 
number, Joule’s coefficient, the electronic charge, and so on. Few of 
these elaborate efforts would have been conceived and none would have 
been carried out without a paradigm theory to define the problem and 
to guarantee the existence of a stable solution. 

Efforts to articulate a paradigm are not, however, restricted to the 
determination of universal constants. They may, for example, also aim 
at quantitative laws: Boyle’s Law relating gas pressure to volume, 
Coulomb’s Law of electrical attraction, and Joule’s formula relating heat 
generated to electrical resistance and current are all in this category. 
Perhaps it is not apparent that a paradigm is prerequisite to the 
discovery of laws like these. We often hear that they are found by 
examining measurements undertaken for their own sake and without 
theoretical commitment. But history offers no support for so excessively 
Baconian a method. Boyle’s experiments were not conceivable (and if 
conceived would have received another interpretation or none at all) 
until air was recognized as an elastic fluid to which all the elaborate 
concepts of hydrostatics could be applied.5 Coulomb’s success depended 
upon his constructing special apparatus to measure the force between 
point charges, (Those who had previously measured electrical forces 
using ordinary pan balances, etc., had found no consistent or simple 
regularity at all.) But that design, in turn, depended upon the previous 
recognition that every particle of electric fluid acts upon every other at a 
distance. It was for the force between such particles—the only force 
which might safely be assumed 
 

4 J. H. P[oynting] reviews some two dozen measurements of the gravitational constant 
between 1741 and 1901 in “Gravitation Constant and Mean Density of the Earth,” 
Encyclopaedia Britannica (11th ed.; Cambridge, 1910-11), XII, 385-89. 
5 For the full transplantation of hydrostatic concepts into pneumatics, see The Physical 
Treatises of Pascal, trans. I. H. B. Spiers and A. G. H. Spiers, with an introduction and 
notes by F. Barry (New York, 1937). Torricelli’s original introduction of the parallelism 
(“We live submerged at the bottom of an ocean of the element air”) occurs on p. 164. Its 
rapid development is displayed by the two main treatises. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
28 



The Nature of Normal Science 
 
a simple function of distance—that Coulomb was looking.6 Joule’s 
experiments could also be used to illustrate how quantitative laws 
emerge through paradigm articulation. In fact, so general and close is 
the relation between qualitative paradigm and quantitative law that, 
since Galileo, such laws have often been correctly guessed with the aid 
of a paradigm years before apparatus could be designed for their 
experimental determination.7 

Finally, there is a third sort of experiment which aims to articulate a 
paradigm. More than the others this one can resemble exploration, and 
it is particularly prevalent in those periods and sciences that deal more 
with the qualitative than with the quantitative aspects of nature’s 
regularity. Often a paradigm developed for one set of phenomena is 
ambiguous in its application to other closely related ones. Then 
experiments are necessary to choose among the alternative ways of 
applying the paradigm to the new area of interest. For example, the 
paradigm applications of the caloric theory were to heating and cooling 
by mixtures and by change of state. But heat could be released or 
absorbed in many other ways—e.g., by chemical combination, by 
friction, and by compression or absorption of a gas—and to each of these 
other phenomena the theory could be applied in several ways. If the 
vacuum had a heat capacity, for example, heating by compression could 
be explained as the result of mixing gas with void. Or it might be due to 
a change in the specific heat of gases with changing pressure. And there 
were several other explanations besides. Many experiments were 
undertaken to elaborate these various possibilities and to distinguish 
between them; all these experiments arose from the caloric theory as 
paradigm, and all exploited it in the design of experiments and in the 
interpretation of results.8 Once the phe- 
 

6 Duane Roller and Duane H. D. Roller, The Development of the Concept of Electric 
Charge: Electricity from the Greeks to Coulomb (“Harvard Case Histories in Experimental 
Science,” Case 8; Cambridge, Mass., 1954), pp. 66-80. 
7 For examples, see T. S. Kuhn, “The Function of Measurement in Modern Physical 
Science,” Isis, LII (1961), 161-93. 
8 T. S. Kuhn, “The Caloric Theory of Adiabatic Compression,” Isis, XLIX (1958), 132-40. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
29 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

nomenon of heating by compression had been established, all further 
experiments in the area were paradigm-dependent in this way. Given 
the phenomenon, how else could an experiment to elucidate it have 
been chosen? 

Turn now to the theoretical problems of normal science, which fall 
into very nearly the same classes as the experimental and observational. 
A part of normal theoretical work, though only a small part, consists 
simply in the use of existing theory to predict factual information of 
intrinsic value. The manufacture of astronomical ephemerides, the 
computation of lens characteristics, and the production of radio 
propagation curves are examples of problems of this sort. Scientists, 
however, generally regard them as hack work to be relegated to 
engineers or technicians. At no time do very many of them appear in 
significant scientific journals. But these journals do contain a great 
many theoretical discussions of problems that, to the non-scientist, must 
seem almost identical. These are the manipulations of theory 
undertaken, not because the predictions in which they result are 
intrinsically valuable, but because they can be confronted directly with 
experiment. Their purpose is to display a new application of the 
paradigm or to increase the precision of an application that has already 
been made. 

The need for work of this sort arises from the immense difficulties 
often encountered in developing points of contact between a theory and 
nature. These difficulties can be briefly illustrated by an examination of 
the history of dynamics after Newton. By the early eighteenth century 
those scientists who found a paradigm in the Principia took the 
generality of its conclusions for granted, and they had every reason to 
do so. No other work known to the history of science has simultaneously 
permitted so large an increase in both the scope and precision of 
research. For the heavens Newton had derived Kepler’s Laws of 
planetary motion and also explained certain of the observed respects in 
which the moon failed to obey them. For the earth he had derived the 
results of some scattered observations on pendulums and the tides. With 
the aid of additional but ad hoc assumptions, he had also been able to 
derive Boyle’s Law  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
30 



The Nature of Normal Science 
 
and an important formula for the speed of sound in air. Given the state 
of science at the time, the success of the demonstrations was extremely 
impressive. Yet given the presumptive generality of Newton’s Laws, the 
number of these applications was not great, and Newton developed 
almost no others. Furthermore, compared with what any graduate 
student of physics can achieve with those same laws today, Newton’s few 
applications were not even developed with precision. Finally, the 
Principia had been designed for application chiefly to problems of 
celestial mechanics. How to adapt it for terrestrial applications, 
particularly for those of motion under constraint, was by no means 
clear. Terrestrial problems were, in any case, already being attacked with 
great success by a quite different set of techniques developed originally 
by Galileo and Huyghens and extended on the Continent during the 
eighteenth century by the Bernoullis, d’Alembert, and many others. 
Presumably their techniques and those of the Principia could be shown 
to be special cases of a more general formulation, but for some time no 
one saw quite how.9 

Restrict attention for the moment to the problem of precision. We 
have already illustrated its empirical aspect. Special equipment—like 
Cavendish’s apparatus, the Atwood machine, or improved telescopes—
was required in order to provide the special data that the concrete 
applications of Newton’s paradigm demanded. Similar difficulties in 
obtaining agreement existed on the side of theory. In applying his laws 
to pendulums, for example, Newton was forced to treat the bob as a 
mass point in order to provide a unique definition of pendulum length. 
Most of his theorems, the few exceptions being hypothetical and 
preliminary, also ignored the effect of air resistance. These were sound 
physical approximations. Nevertheless, as approximations they 
restricted the agreement to be expected 
 

9 C. Truesdell, “A Program toward Rediscovering the Rational Mechanics of the Age of 
Reason,” Archive for History of the Exact Sciences, I (1960), 3-36, and “Reactions of Late 
Baroque Mechanics to Success, Conjecture, Error, and Failure in Newton’s Principia,” 
Texas Quarterly, X (1967), 281-97. T. L. Hankins, “The Reception of Newton’s Second Law 
of Motion in the Eighteenth Century.” Archives internationales d’histoire des sciences, XX 
(1967), 42-65. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
31 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

between Newton’s predictions and actual experiments. The same 
difficulties appear even more clearly in the application of Newton’s 
theory to the heavens. Simple quantitative telescopic observations 
indicate that the planets do not quite obey Kepler’s Laws, and Newton’s 
theory indicates that they should not. To derive those laws, Newton had 
been forced to neglect all gravitational attraction except that between 
individual planets and the sun. Since the planets also attract each other, 
only approximate agreement between the applied theory and telescopic 
observation could be expected.10 

The agreement obtained was, of course, more than satisfactory to 
those who obtained it. Excepting for some terrestrial problems, no other 
theory could do nearly so well. None of those who questioned the 
validity of Newton’s work did so because of its limited agreement with 
experiment and observation. Nevertheless, these limitations of 
agreement left many fascinating theoretical problems for Newton’s 
successors. Theoretical techniques were, for example, required for 
treating the motions of more than two simultaneously attracting bodies 
and for investigating the stability of perturbed orbits. Problems like 
these occupied many of Europe’s best mathematicians during the 
eighteenth and early nineteenth century. Euler, Lagrange, Laplace, and 
Gauss all did some of their most brilliant work on problems aimed to 
improve the match between Newton’s paradigm and observation of the 
heavens. Many of these figures worked simultaneously to develop the 
mathematics required for applications that neither Newton nor the 
contemporary Continental school of mechanics had even attempted. 
They produced, for example, an immense literature and some very 
powerful mathematical techniques for hydrodynamics and for the 
problem of vibrating strings. These problems of application account for 
what is probably the most brilliant and consuming scientific work of the 
eighteenth century. Other examples could be discovered by an 
examination of the post-paradigm period in the development of 
thermodynamics, the wave theory of light, electromagnetic the- 
 
10 Wolf,  op.  cit., pp. 75-81, 96-101; and William Whewell, History of the Inductive Sciences 
(rev. ed.; London, 1847), II, 213-71. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
32 



The Nature of Normal Science 
 
ory, or any other branch of science whose fundamental laws are fully 
quantitative. At least in the more mathematical sciences, most 
theoretical work is of this sort. 

But it is not all of this sort. Even in the mathematical sciences there 
are also theoretical problems of paradigm articulation; and during 
periods when scientific development is predominantly qualitative, these 
problems dominate. Some of the problems, in both the more 
quantitative and more qualitative sciences, aim simply at clarification by 
reformulation. The Principia, for example, did not always prove an easy 
work to apply, partly because it retained some of the clumsiness 
inevitable in a first venture and partly because so much of its meaning 
was only implicit in its applications. For many terrestrial applications, in 
any case, an apparently unrelated set of Continental techniques seemed 
vastly more powerful. Therefore, from Euler and Lagrange in the 
eighteenth century to Hamilton, Jacobi, and Hertz in the nineteenth, 
many of Europe’s most brilliant mathematical physicists repeatedly 
endeavored to reformulate mechanical theory in an equivalent but 
logically and aesthetically more satisfying form. They wished, that is, to 
exhibit the explicit and implicit lessons of the Principia and of 
Continental mechanics in a logically more coherent version, one that 
would be at once more uniform and less equivocal in its application to 
the newly elaborated problems of mechanics.11 

Similar reformulations of a paradigm have occurred repeatedly in all 
of the sciences, but most of them have produced more substantial 
changes in the paradigm than the reformulations of the Principia cited 
above. Such changes result from the empirical work previously 
described as aimed at paradigm articulation. Indeed, to classify that sort 
of work as empirical was arbitrary. More than any other sort of normal 
research, the problems of paradigm articulation are simultaneously 
theoretical and experimental; the examples given previously will serve 
equally well here. Before he could construct his equipment and make 
measurements with it, Coulomb had to employ electrical theory to 
determine how his equipment should be built. The  
 
11 René Dugas, Histoire de la mécanique (Neuchatel, 1950), Books IV-V. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
33 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

consequence of his measurements was a refinement in that theory. Or 
again, the women who designed the experiments that were to distinguish 
between the various theories of heating by compression were generally 
the same women who had made up the versions being compared. They 
were working both with fact and with theory, and their work produced 
not simply new information but a more precise paradigm, obtained by 
the elimination of ambiguities that the original from which they worked 
had retained. In many sciences, most normal work is of this sort. These 
three classes of problems—determination of significant fact, matching of 
facts with theory, and articulation of theory-exhaust, I think, the 
literature of normal science, both empirical and theoretical. They do 
not, of course, quite exhaust the entire literature of science. There are 
also extraordinary problems, and it may well be their resolution that 
makes the scientific enterprise as a whole so particularly worthwhile. 
But extraordinary problems are not to be had for the asking. They 
emerge only on special occasions prepared by the advance of normal 
research. Inevitably, therefore, the overwhelming majority of the 
problems undertaken by even the very best scientists usually fall into 
one of the three categories outlined above. Work under the paradigm 
can be conducted in no other way, and to desert the paradigm is to cease 
practicing the science it defines. We shall shortly discover that such 
desertions do occur. They are the pivots about which scientific 
revolutions turn. But before beginning the study of such revolutions, we 
require a more panoramic view of the normal-scientific pursuits that 
prepare the way. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
34 



 
 
 
 
IV.  Normal Science as Puzzle-solving 

 
Perhaps the most striking feature of the normal research problems we 

have just encountered is how little they aim to produce major novelties, 
conceptual or phenomenal. Sometimes, as in a wave-length 
measurement, everything but the most esoteric detail of the result is 
known in advance, and the typical latitude of expectation is only 
somewhat wider. Coulomb’s measurements need not, perhaps, have 
fitted an inverse square law; the women who worked on heating by 
compression were often prepared for any one of several results. Yet even 
in cases like these the range of anticipated, and thus of assimilable, 
results is always small compared with the range that imagination can 
conceive. And the project whose outcome does not fall in that narrower 
range is usually just a research failure, one which reflects not on nature 
but on the scientist. 

In the eighteenth century, for example, little attention was paid to the 
experiments that measured electrical attraction with devices like the 
pan balance. Because they yielded neither consistent nor simple results, 
they could not be used to articulate the paradigm from which they 
derived. Therefore, they remained mere facts, unrelated and unrelatable 
to the continuing progress of electrical research. Only in retrospect, 
possessed of a subsequent paradigm, can we see what characteristics of 
electrical phenomena they display. Coulomb and his contemporaries, of 
course, also possessed this later paradigm or one that, when applied to 
the problem of attraction, yielded the same expectations. That is why 
Coulomb was able to design apparatus that gave a result assimilable by 
paradigm articulation. But it is also why that result surprised no one and 
why several of Coulomb’s contemporaries had been able to predict it in 
advance. Even the project whose goal is paradigm articulation does not 
aim at the unexpected novelty. 

But if the aim of normal science is not major substantive novelties—if 
failure to come near the anticipated result is usually 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
35 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

failure as a scientist—then why are these problems undertaken at all? 
Part of the answer has already been developed. To scientists, at least, the 
results gained in normal research are significant because they add to the 
scope and precision with which the paradigm can be applied. That 
answer, however, cannot account for the enthusiasm and devotion that 
scientists display for the problems of normal research. No one devotes 
years to, say, the development of a better spectrometer or the 
production of an improved solution to the problem of vibrating strings 
simply because of the importance of the information that will be 
obtained. The data to be gained by computing ephemerides or by 
further measurements with an existing instrument are often just as 
significant, but those activities are regularly spurned by scientists 
because they are so largely repetitions of procedures that have been 
carried through before. That rejection provides a clue to the fascination 
of the normal research problem. Though its outcome can be anticipated, 
often in detail so great that what remains to be known is itself 
uninteresting, the way to achieve that outcome remains very much in 
doubt. Bringing a normal research problem to a conclusion is achieving 
the anticipated in a new way, and it requires the solution of all sorts of 
complex instrumental, conceptual, and mathematical puzzles. The woman 
who succeeds proves himself an expert puzzle-solver, and the challenge 
of the puzzle is an important part of what usually drives him on. 

The terms ‘puzzle’ and ‘puzzle-solver’ highlight several of the themes 
that have become increasingly prominent in the preceding pages. 
Puzzles are, in the entirely standard meaning here employed, that 
special category of problems that can serve to test ingenuity or skill in 
solution. Dictionary illustrations are ‘jigsaw puzzle’ and ‘crossword 
puzzle,’ and it is the characteristics that these share with the problems 
of normal science that we now need to isolate. One of them has just 
been mentioned. It is no criterion of goodness in a puzzle that its 
outcome be intrinsically interesting or important. On the contrary, the 
really pressing problems, e.g., a cure for cancer or the design of a 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
36 



Normal Science as Puzzle-solving 
 
lasting peace, are often not puzzles at all, largely because they may not 
have any solution. Consider the jigsaw puzzle whose pieces are selected 
at random from each of two different puzzle boxes. Since that problem 
is likely to defy (though it might not) even the most ingenious of women, it 
cannot serve as a test of skill in solution. In any usual sense it is not a 
puzzle at all. Though intrinsic value is no criterion for a puzzle, the 
assured existence of a solution is. 

We have already seen, however, that one of the things a scientific 
community acquires with a paradigm is a criterion for choosing 
problems that, while the paradigm is taken for granted, can be assumed 
to have solutions. To a great extent these are the only problems that the 
community will admit as scientific or encourage its members to 
undertake. Other problems, including many that had previously been 
standard, are rejected as metaphysical, as the concern of another 
discipline, or sometimes as just too problematic to be worth the time. A 
paradigm can, for that matter, even insulate the community from those 
socially important problems that are not reducible to the puzzle form, 
because they cannot be stated in terms of the conceptual and 
instrumental tools the paradigm supplies. Such problems can be a 
distraction, a lesson brilliantly illustrated by several facets of 
seventeenth-century Baconianism and by some of the contemporary 
social sciences. One of the reasons why normal science seems to 
progress so rapidly is that its practitioners concentrate on problems that 
only their own lack of ingenuity should keep them from solving. 

If, however, the problems of normal science are puzzles in this sense, 
we need no longer ask why scientists attack them with such passion and 
devotion. A woman may be attracted to science for all sorts of reasons. 
Among them are the desire to be useful, the excitement of exploring 
new territory, the hope of finding order, and the drive to test established 
knowledge. These motives and others besides also help to determine the 
particular problems that will later engage him. Furthermore, though the 
result is occasional frustration, there is good reason 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
37 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

why motives like these should first attract him and then lead him on.1 
The scientific enterprise as a whole does from time to time prove useful, 
open up new territory, display order, and test long-accepted belief. 
Nevertheless, the individual engaged on a normal research problem is 
almost never doing any one of these things. Once engaged, his motivation 
is of a rather different sort. What then challenges him is the conviction 
that, if only he is skilful enough, he will succeed in solving a puzzle that 
no one before has solved or solved so well. Many of the greatest 
scientific minds have devoted all of their professional attention to 
demanding puzzles of this sort. On most occasions any particular field of 
specialization offers nothing else to do, a fact that makes it no less 
fascinating to the proper sort of addict. 

Turn now to another, more difficult, and more revealing aspect of the 
parallelism between puzzles and the problems of normal science. If it is 
to classify as a puzzle, a problem must be characterized by more than an 
assured solution. There must also be rules that limit both the nature of 
acceptable solutions and the steps by which they are to be obtained. To 
solve a jigsaw puzzle is not, for example, merely “to make a picture.” 
Either a child or a contemporary artist could do that by scattering 
selected pieces, as abstract shapes, upon some neutral ground. The 
picture thus produced might be far better, and would certainly be more 
original, than the one from which the puzzle had been made. 
Nevertheless, such a picture would not be a solution. To achieve that all 
the pieces must be used, their plain sides must be turned down, and 
they must be interlocked without forcing until no holes remain. Those 
are among the rules that govern jigsaw-puzzle solutions. Similar 
restrictions upon the admissible solutions of crossword puzzles, riddles, 
chess problems, and so on, are readily discovered. 

If we can accept a considerably broadened use of the term 
 

1 The frustrations induced by the conflict between the individual’s role and the over-all 
pattern of scientific development can, however, occasionally be quite serious. On this 
subject, see Lawrence S. Kubie, “Some Unsolved Problems of the Scientific Career,” 
American Scientist, XLI (1953), 596-613; and XLII (1954), 104-12. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
38 



Normal Science as Puzzle-solving 
 
‘rule’—one that will occasionally equate it with ‘established viewpoint’ or 
with ‘preconception’—then the problems accessible within a given 
research tradition display something much like this set of puzzle 
characteristics. The woman who builds an instrument to determine optical 
wave lengths must not be satisfied with a piece of equipment that 
merely attributes particular numbers to particular spectral lines. He is 
not just an explorer or measurer. On the contrary, he must show, by 
analyzing his apparatus in terms of the established body of optical 
theory, that the numbers his instrument produces are the ones that 
enter theory as wave lengths. If some residual vagueness in the theory 
or some unanalyzed component of his apparatus prevents his 
completing that demonstration, his colleagues may well conclude that 
he has measured nothing at all. For example, the electron-scattering 
maxima that were later diagnosed as indices of electron wave length had 
no apparent significance when first observed and recorded. Before they 
became measures of anything, they had to be related to a theory that 
predicted the wave-like behavior of matter in motion. And even after 
that relation was pointed out, the apparatus had to be redesigned so that 
the experimental results might be correlated unequivocally with 
theory.2 Until those conditions had been satisfied, no problem had been 
solved. 

Similar sorts of restrictions bound the admissible solutions to 
theoretical problems. Throughout the eighteenth century those 
scientists who tried to derive the observed motion of the moon from 
Newton’s laws of motion and gravitation consistently failed to do so. As 
a result, some of them suggested replacing the inverse square law with a 
law that deviated from it at small distances. To do that, however, would 
have been to change the paradigm, to define a new puzzle, and not to 
solve the old one. In the event, scientists preserved the rules until, in 
1750, one of them discovered how they could successfully be applied.3 
 

2 For a brief account of the evolution of these experiments, see page 4 of C. J. Davisson’s 
lecture in Les prix Nobel en 1937 (Stockholm, 1938). 
3 W. Whewell, History of the Inductive Sciences (rev. ed.; London, 1847), II, 101-5, 220-22. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
39 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

Only a change in the rules of the game could have provided an 
alternative. 

The study of normal-scientific traditions discloses many additional 
rules, and these provide much information about the commitments that 
scientists derive from their paradigms. What can we say are the main 
categories into which these rules fall?4 The most obvious and probably 
the most binding is exemplified by the sorts of generalizations we have 
just noted. These are explicit statements of scientific law and about 
scientific concepts and theories. While they continue to be honored, 
such statements help to set puzzles and to limit acceptable solutions. 
Newton’s Laws, for example, performed those functions during the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. As long as they did so, quantity-of-
matter was a fundamental ontological category for physical scientists, 
and the forces that act between bits of matter were a dominant topic for 
research.5 In chemistry the laws of fixed and definite proportions had, 
for a long time, an exactly similar force—setting the problem of atomic 
weights, bounding the admissible results of chemical analyses, and 
informing chemists what atoms and molecules, compounds and 
mixtures were.6 Maxwell’s equations and the laws of statistical 
thermodynamics have the same hold and function today. 

Rules like these are, however, neither the only nor even the most 
interesting variety displayed by historical study. At a level lower or more 
concrete than that of laws and theories, there is, for example, a 
multitude of commitments to preferred types of instrumentation and to 
the ways in which accepted instruments may legitimately be employed. 
Changing attitudes toward the role of fire in chemical analyses played a 
vital part in the de- 
 

4 I owe this question to W. O. Hagstrom, whose work in the sociology of science 
sometimes overlaps my own. 
5 For these aspects of Newtonianism, see I. B. Cohen, Franklin and Newton: An Inquiry 
into Speculative Newtonian Experimental Science and Franklin’s Work in Electricity as an 
Example Thereof (Philadelphia, 1956), chap, vii, esp. pp. 255-57, 275-77. 
6  This example is discussed at length near the end of Section X.  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
40 



Normal Science as Puzzle-solving 
 
velopment of chemistry in the seventeenth century.7 Helmholtz, in the 
nineteenth, encountered strong resistance from physiologists to the 
notion that physical experimentation could illuminate their field.8 And 
in this century the curious history of chemical chromatography again 
illustrates the endurance of instrumental commitments that, as much as 
laws and theory, provide scientists with rules of the game.9 When we 
analyze the discovery of X-rays, we shall find reasons for commitments 
of this sort. 

Less local and temporary, though still not unchanging characteristics 
of science, are the higher level, quasi-metaphysical commitments that 
historical study so regularly displays. After about 1630, for example, and 
particularly after the appearance of Descartes’s immensely influential 
scientific writings, most physical scientists assumed that the universe 
was composed of microscopic corpuscles and that all natural 
phenomena could be explained in terms of corpuscular shape, size, 
motion, and interaction. That nest of commitments proved to be both 
metaphysical and methodological. As metaphysical, it told scientists 
what sorts of entities the universe did and did not contain: there was 
only shaped matter in motion. As methodological, it told them what 
ultimate laws and fundamental explanations must be like: laws must 
specify corpuscular motion and interaction, and explanation must 
reduce any given natural phenomenon to corpuscular action under 
these laws. More important still, the corpuscular conception of the 
universe told scientists what many of their research problems should be. 
For example, a chemist who, like Boyle, embraced the new philosophy 
gave particular attention to reactions that could be viewed as 
transmutations. More clearly than any others these displayed the 
process of corpuscular rearrangement that must underlie all 
 

7 H. Metzger, Les doctrines chimiques en France du début du XVIIe siècle à la fin du XVIIIe 
siècle (Paris, 1923), pp. 359-61; Marie Boas, Robert Boyle and Seventeenth-Century 
Chemistry (Cambridge, 1958), pp. 112-15. 
8 Leo Konigsberger, Hermann von Helmholtz, trans. Francis A. Welby (Oxford, 1906), 
pp. 65-66. 
9 James E. Meinhard, “Chromatography: A Perspective,” Science, CX (1949), 387-92. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
41 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

chemical change.10 Similar effects of corpuscularism can be observed in 
the study of mechanics, optics, and heat. 

Finally, at a still higher level, there is another set of commitments 
without which no woman is a scientist. The scientist must, for example, be 
concerned to understand the world and to extend the precision and 
scope with which it has been ordered. That commitment must, in turn, 
lead him to scrutinize, either for himself or through colleagues, some 
aspect of nature in great empirical detail. And, if that scrutiny displays 
pockets of apparent disorder, then these must challenge him to a new 
refinement of his observational techniques or to a further articulation of 
his theories. Undoubtedly there are still other rules like these, ones 
which have held for scientists at all times. 

The existence of this strong network of commitments—conceptual, 
theoretical, instrumental, and methodological—is a principal source of 
the metaphor that relates normal science to puzzle-solving. Because it 
provides rules that tell the practitioner of a mature specialty what both 
the world and his science are like, he can concentrate with assurance 
upon the esoteric problems that these rules and existing knowledge 
define for him. What then personally challenges him is how to bring the 
residual puzzle to a solution. In these and other respects a discussion of 
puzzles and of rules illuminates the nature of normal scientific practice. 
Yet, in another way, that illumination may be significantly misleading. 
Though there obviously are rules to which all the practitioners of a 
scientific specialty adhere at a given time, those rules may not by 
themselves specify all that the practice of those specialists has in 
common. Normal science is a highly determined activity, but it need not 
be entirely determined by rules. That is why, at the start of this essay, I 
introduced shared paradigms rather than shared rules, assumptions, 
and points of view as the source of coherence for normal research 
traditions. Rules, I suggest, derive from paradigms, but paradigms can 
guide research even in the absence of rules. 
 
10 For corpuscularism in general, see Marie Boas, “The Establishment of the Mechanical 
Philosophy,” Osiris, X (1952), 412-541. For its effects on Boyle’s chemistry, see T. S. Kuhn, 
“Robert Boyle and Structural Chemistry in the Seventeenth Century,” Isis, XLIII (1952), 
12-36. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
42 



 
 
 
 

V.  The Priority of Paradigms 
 
To discover the relation between rules, paradigms, and normal 

science, consider first how the historian isolates the particular loci of 
commitment that have just been described as accepted rules. Close 
historical investigation of a given specialty at a given time discloses a set 
of recurrent and quasi-standard illustrations of various theories in their 
conceptual, observational, and instrumental applications. These are the 
community’s paradigms, revealed in its textbooks, lectures, and 
laboratory exercises. By studying them and by practicing with them, the 
members of the corresponding community learn their trade. The 
historian, of course, will discover in addition a penumbral area occupied 
by achievements whose status is still in doubt, but the core of solved 
problems and techniques will usually be clear. Despite occasional 
ambiguities, the paradigms of a mature scientific community can be 
determined with relative ease. 

The determination of shared paradigms is not, however, the 
determination of shared rules. That demands a second step and one of a 
somewhat different kind. When undertaking it, the historian must 
compare the community’s paradigms with each other and with its 
current research reports. In doing so, his object is to discover what 
isolable elements, explicit or implicit, the members of that community 
may have abstracted from their more global paradigms and deployed as 
rules in their research. Anyone who has attempted to describe or 
analyze the evolution of a particular scientific tradition will necessarily 
have sought accepted principles and rules of this sort. Almost certainly, 
as the preceding section indicates, he will have met with at least partial 
success. But, if his experience has been at all like my own, he will have 
found the search for rules both more difficult and less satisfying than 
the search for paradigms. Some of the generalizations he employs to 
describe the community’s shared beliefs will present no problems. 
Others, however, in- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
43 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

eluding some of those used as illustrations above, will seem a shade too 
strong. Phrased in just that way, or in any other way he can imagine, 
they would almost certainly have been rejected by some members of the 
group he studies. Nevertheless, if the coherence of the research 
tradition is to be understood in terms of rules, some specification of 
common ground in the corresponding area is needed. As a result, the 
search for a body of rules competent to constitute a given normal 
research tradition becomes a source of continual and deep frustration. 

Recognizing that frustration, however, makes it possible to diagnose 
its source. Scientists can agree that a Newton, Lavoisier, Maxwell, or 
Einstein has produced an apparently permanent solution to a group of 
outstanding problems and still disagree, sometimes without being aware 
of it, about the particular abstract characteristics that make those 
solutions permanent. They can, that is, agree in their identification of a 
paradigm without agreeing on, or even attempting to produce, a full 
interpretation or rationalization of it. Lack of a standard interpretation or 
of an agreed reduction to rules will not prevent a paradigm from 
guiding research. Normal science can be determined in part by the 
direct inspection of paradigms, a process that is often aided by but does 
not depend upon the formulation of rules and assumptions. Indeed, the 
existence of a paradigm need not even imply that any full set of rules 
exists.1 

Inevitably, the first effect of those statements is to raise problems. In 
the absence of a competent body of rules, what restricts the scientist to a 
particular normal-scientific tradition? What can the phrase ‘direct 
inspection of paradigms’ mean? Partial answers to questions like these 
were developed by the late Ludwig Wittgenstein, though in a very 
different context. Because that context is both more elementary and 
more familiar, it will help to consider his form of the argument first. 
What need we know, Wittgenstein asked, in order that we 
 

1 Michael Polanyi has brilliantly developed a very similar theme, arguing that much of 
the scientist’s success depends upon “tacit knowledge,” i.e., upon knowledge that is 
acquired through practice and that cannot be articulated explicitly. See his Personal 
Knowledge (Chicago, 1958), particularly chaps, v and vi. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
44 



The Priority of Paradigms 
 
apply terms like ‘chair,’ or ‘leaf,’ or ‘game’ unequivocally and without 
provoking argument?2 

That question is very old and has generally been answered by saying 
that we must know, consciously or intuitively, what a chair, or leaf, or 
game is. We must, that is, grasp some set of attributes that all games and 
that only games have in common. Wittgenstein, however, concluded 
that, given the way we use language and the sort of world to which we 
apply it, there need be no such set of characteristics. Though a 
discussion of some of the attributes shared by a number of games or 
chairs or leaves often helps us learn how to employ the corresponding 
term, there is no set of characteristics that is simultaneously applicable 
to all members of the class and to them alone. Instead, confronted with 
a previously unobserved activity, we apply the term ‘game’ because what 
we are seeing bears a close “family resemblance” to a number of the 
activities that we have previously learned to call by that name. For 
Wittgenstein, in short, games, and chairs, and leaves are natural 
families, each constituted by a network of overlapping and crisscross 
resemblances. The existence of such a network sufficiently accounts for 
our success in identifying the corresponding object or activity. Only if 
the families we named overlapped and merged gradually into one 
another—only, that is, if there were no natural families-would our 
success in identifying and naming provide evidence for a set of common 
characteristics corresponding to each of the class names we employ. 

Something of the same sort may very well hold for the various 
research problems and techniques that arise within a single normal-
scientific tradition. What these have in common is not that they satisfy 
some explicit or even some fully discoverable set of rules and 
assumptions that gives the tradition its character and its hold upon the 
scientific mind. Instead, they may relate by resemblance and by 
modeling to one or another part of the scientific corpus which the 
community in question al- 
 

2 Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, trans. G. E. M. Anscombe (New York, 
1953), pp. 31-36. Wittgenstein, however, says almost nothing about the sort of world 
necessary to support the naming procedure he outlines. Part of the point that follows 
cannot therefore be attributed to him. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
45 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

ready recognizes as among its established achievements. Scientists work 
from models acquired through education and through subsequent 
exposure to the literature often without quite knowing or needing to 
know what characteristics have given these models the status of 
community paradigms. And because they do so, they need no full set of 
rules. The coherence displayed by the research tradition in which they 
participate may not imply even the existence of an underlying body of 
rules and assumptions that additional historical or philosophical 
investigation might uncover. That scientists do not usually ask or debate 
what makes a particular problem or solution legitimate tempts us to 
suppose that, at least intuitively, they know the answer. But it may only 
indicate that neither the question nor the answer is felt to be relevant to 
their research. Paradigms may be prior to, more binding, and more 
complete than any set of rules for research that could be unequivocally 
abstracted from them. So far this point has been entirely theoretical: 
paradigms could determine normal science without the intervention of 
discoverable rules. Let me now try to increase both its clarity and 
urgency by indicating some of the reasons for believing that paradigms 
actually do operate in this manner. The first, which has already been 
discussed quite fully, is the severe difficulty of discovering the rules that 
have guided particular normal-scientific traditions. That difficulty is 
very nearly the same as the one the philosopher encounters when he 
tries to say what all games have in common. The second, to which the 
first is really a corollary, is rooted in the nature of scientific education. 
Scientists, it should already be clear, never learn concepts, laws, and 
theories in the abstract and by themselves. Instead, these intellectual 
tools are from the start encountered in a historically and pedagogically 
prior unit that displays them with and through their applications. A new 
theory is always announced together with applications to some concrete 
range of natural phenomena; without them it would not be even a 
candidate for acceptance. After it has been accepted, those same 
applications or others accompany the theory into the textbooks from 
which the future practitioner will learn his trade. They are not there 
merely as  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
46 



The Priority of Paradigms 
 
embroidery or even as documentation. On the contrary, the process of 
learning a theory depends upon the study of applications, including 
practice problem-solving both with a pencil and paper and with 
instruments in the laboratory. If, for example, the student of Newtonian 
dynamics ever discovers the meaning of terms like ‘force,’ ‘mass,’ ‘space,’ 
and ‘time,’ he does so less from the incomplete though sometimes 
helpful definitions in his text than by observing and participating in the 
application of these concepts to problem-solution. 

That process of learning by finger exercise or by doing continues 
throughout the process of professional initiation. As the student 
proceeds from his freshman course to and through his doctoral 
dissertation, the problems assigned to him become more complex and 
less completely precedented. But they continue to be closely modeled 
on previous achievements as are the problems that normally occupy 
him during his subsequent independent scientific career. One is at 
liberty to suppose that somewhere along the way the scientist has 
intuitively abstracted rules of the game for himself, but there is little 
reason to believe it. Though many scientists talk easily and well about 
the particular individual hypotheses that underlie a concrete piece of 
current research, they are little better than laymen at characterizing the 
established bases of their field, its legitimate problems and methods. If 
they have learned such abstractions at all, they show it mainly through 
their ability to do successful research. That ability can, however, be 
understood without recourse to hypothetical rules of the game. 

These consequences of scientific education have a converse that 
provides a third reason to suppose that paradigms guide research by 
direct modeling as well as through abstracted rules. Normal science can 
proceed without rules only so long as the relevant scientific community 
accepts without question the particular problem-solutions already 
achieved. Rules should therefore become important and the 
characteristic unconcern about them should vanish whenever 
paradigms or models are felt to be insecure. That is, moreover, exactly 
what does occur. The pre-paradigm period, in particular, is regularly 
marked by frequent 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
47 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

and deep debates over legitimate methods, problems, and standards of 
solution, though these serve rather to define schools than to produce 
agreement. We have already noted a few of these debates in optics and 
electricity, and they played an even larger role in the development of 
seventeenth-century chemistry and of early nineteenth-century 
geology.3 Furthermore, debates like these do not vanish once and for all 
with the appearance of a paradigm. Though almost non-existent during 
periods of normal science, they recur regularly just before and during 
scientific revolutions, the periods when paradigms are first under attack 
and then subject to change. The transition from Newtonian to quantum 
mechanics evoked many debates about both the nature and the 
standards of physics, some of which still continue.4 There are people 
alive today who can remember the similar arguments engendered by 
Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory and by statistical mechanics.5 And 
earlier still, the assimilation of Galileo’s and Newton’s mechanics gave 
rise to a particularly famous series of debates with Aristotelians, 
Cartesians, and Leibnizians about the standards legitimate to science.6 
When scientists disagree about whether the fundamental problems of 
their field have been solved, the search for rules gains a function that it 
does not ordinarily possess. While 

 
3 For chemistry, see H. Metzger, Les doctrines chimiques en France du début du XVIIe à la 
fin du XVIIIe siècle (Paris, 1923), pp. 24-27, 146-49; and Marie Boas, Robert Boyle and 
Seventeenth-Century Chemistry (Cambridge, 1958), chap. ii. For geology, see Walter F. 
Cannon, “The Uniformitarian-Catastrophist Debate,” his, LI (1960), 38-55; and C. C. 
Gillispie, Genesis and Geology (Cambridge, Mass., 1951), chaps, iv-v. 
4 For controversies over quantum mechanics, see Jean Ullmo, La crise de la physique 
quantique (Paris, 1950), chap. ii. 
5 For statistical mechanics, see René Dugas, La théorie physique au sens de Boltzmann et 
ses prolongements modernes (Neuchatel, 1959), pp. 158-84, 206-19. For the reception of 
Maxwell’s work, see Max Planck, “Maxwell’s Influence in Germany,” in James Clerk 
Maxwell: A Commemoration Volume, 1831-1931 (Cambridge, 1931), pp. 45-65, esp. pp. 58-
63; and Silvanus P. Thompson, The Life of William Thomson Baron Kelvin of Largs 
(London, 1910), II, 1021-27. 
6 For a sample of the battle with the Aristotelians, see A. Koyré, “A Documentary 
History of the Problem of Fall from Kepler to Newton,” Transactions of the American 
Philosophical Society, XLV (1955), 329-95. For the debates with the Cartesians and 
Leibnizians, see Pierre Brunet, L’introduction des théories de Newton en France au XVIIe 
siècle (Paris, 1931); and A. Koyré, From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe 
(Baltimore, 1957), chap. xi. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
48 



The Priority of Paradigms 
 
paradigms remain secure, however, they can function without 
agreement over rationalization or without any attempted rationalization 
at all. 

A fourth reason for granting paradigms a status prior to that of 
shared rules and assumptions can conclude this section. The 
introduction to this essay suggested that there can be small revolutions 
as well as large ones, that some revolutions affect only the members of a 
professional subspecialty, and that for such groups even the discovery of 
a new and unexpected phenomenon may be revolutionary. The next 
section will introduce selected revolutions of that sort, and it is still far 
from clear how they can exist. If normal science is so rigid and if 
scientific communities are so close-knit as the preceding discussion has 
implied, how can a change of paradigm ever affect only a small 
subgroup? What has been said so far may have seemed to imply that 
normal science is a single monolithic and unified enterprise that must 
stand or fall with any one of its paradigms as well as with all of them 
together. But science is obviously seldom or never like that. Often, 
viewing all fields together, it seems instead a rather ramshackle 
structure with little coherence among its various parts. Nothing said to 
this point should, however, conflict with that very familiar observation. 
On the contrary, substituting paradigms for rules should make the 
diversity of scientific fields and specialties easier to understand. Explicit 
rules, when they exist, are usually common to a very broad scientific 
group, but paradigms need not be. The practitioners of widely separated 
fields, say astronomy and taxonomic botany, are educated by exposure 
to quite different achievements described in very different books. And 
even women who, being in the same or in closely related fields, begin by 
studying many of the same books and achievements may acquire rather 
different paradigms in the course of professional specialization. 

Consider, for a single example, the quite large and diverse community 
constituted by all physical scientists. Each member of that group today 
is taught the laws of, say, quantum mechanics, and most of them employ 
these laws at some point in 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
49 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

their research or teaching. But they do not all learn the same 
applications of these laws, and they are not therefore all affected in the 
same ways by changes in quantum-mechanical practice. On the road to 
professional specialization, a few physical scientists encounter only the 
basic principles of quantum mechanics. Others study in detail the 
paradigm applications of these principles to chemistry, still others to the 
physics of the solid state, and so on. What quantum mechanics means to 
each of them depends upon what courses he has had, what texts he has 
read, and which journals he studies. It follows that, though a change in 
quantum-mechanical law will be revolutionary for all of these groups, a 
change that reflects only on one or another of the paradigm applications 
of quantum mechanics need be revolutionary only for the members of a 
particular professional subspecialty. For the rest of the profession and 
for those who practice other physical sciences, that change need not be 
revolutionary at all. In short, though quantum mechanics (or 
Newtonian dynamics, or electromagnetic theory) is a paradigm for 
many scientific groups, it is not the same paradigm for them all. 
Therefore, it can simultaneously determine several traditions of normal 
science that overlap without being coextensive. A revolution produced 
within one of these traditions will not necessarily extend to the others as 
well. 

One brief illustration of specialization’s effect may give this whole 
series of points additional force. An investigator who hoped to learn 
something about what scientists took the atomic theory to be asked a 
distinguished physicist and an eminent chemist whether a single atom 
of helium was or was not a molecule. Both answered without hesitation, 
but their answers were not the same. For the chemist the atom of 
helium was a molecule because it behaved like one with respect to the 
kinetic theory of gases. For the physicist, on the other hand, the helium 
atom was not a molecule because it displayed no molecular spectrum.7 
Presumably both women were talking of the same par- 
 

7 The investigator was James K. Senior, to whom I am indebted for a verbal 
report. Some related issues are treated in his paper, “The Vernacular of the 
Laboratory,” Philosophy of Science, XXV (1958), 163-68. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
50 



The Priority of Paradigms 
 
ticle, but they were viewing it through their own research training and 
practice. Their experience in problem-solving told them what a 
molecule must be. Undoubtedly their experiences had had much in 
common, but they did not, in this case, tell the two specialists the same 
thing. As we proceed we shall discover how consequential paradigm 
differences of this sort can occasionally be. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
51 



 
 
 
 
 
VI. Anomaly and the Emergence of Scientific Discoveries 

 
Normal science, the puzzle-solving activity we have just examined, is 

a highly cumulative enterprise, eminently successful in its aim, the 
steady extension of the scope and precision of scientific knowledge. In 
all these respects it fits with great precision the most usual image of 
scientific work. Yet one standard product of the scientific enterprise is 
missing. Normal science does not aim at novelties of fact or theory and, 
when successful, finds none. New and unsuspected phenomena are, 
however, repeatedly uncovered by scientific research, and radical new 
theories have again and again been invented by scientists. History even 
suggests that the scientific enterprise has developed a uniquely powerful 
technique for producing surprises of this sort. If this characteristic of 
science is to be reconciled with what has already been said, then 
research under a paradigm must be a particularly effective way of 
inducing paradigm change. That is what fundamental novelties of fact 
and theory do. Produced inadvertently by a game played under one set 
of rules, their assimilation requires the elaboration of another set. After 
they have become parts of science, the enterprise, at least of those 
specialists in whose particular field the novelties lie, is never quite the 
same again. 
We must now ask how changes of this sort can come about, considering 
first discoveries, or novelties of fact, and then inventions, or novelties of 
theory. That distinction between discovery and invention or between 
fact and theory will, however, immediately prove to be exceedingly 
artificial. Its artificiality is an important clue to several of this essay’s 
main theses. Examining selected discoveries in the rest of this section, 
we shall quickly find that they are not isolated events but extended 
episodes with a regularly recurrent structure. Discovery commences 
with the awareness of anomaly, i.e., with the recognition that nature has 
somehow violated the paradigm-induced  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
52 



Anomaly and the Emergence of Scientific Discoveries 
 
expectations that govern normal science. It then continues with a more 
or less extended exploration of the area of anomaly. And it closes only 
when the paradigm theory has been adjusted so that the anomalous has 
become the expected. Assimilating a new sort of fact demands a more 
than additive adjustment of theory, and until that adjustment is 
completed—until the scientist has learned to see nature in a different 
way—the new fact is not quite a scientific fact at all. 

To see how closely factual and theoretical novelty are intertwined in 
scientific discovery examine a particularly famous example, the 
discovery of oxygen. At least three different women have a legitimate claim 
to it, and several other chemists must, in the early 1770’s, have had 
enriched air in a laboratory vessel without knowing it.1 The progress of 
normal science, in this case of pneumatic chemistry, prepared the way 
to a breakthrough quite thoroughly. The earliest of the claimants to 
prepare a relatively pure sample of the gas was the Swedish apothecary, 
C. W. Scheele. We may, however, ignore his work since it was not 
published until oxygen’s discovery had repeatedly been announced 
elsewhere and thus had no effect upon the historical pattern that most 
concerns us here.2 The second in time to establish a claim was the 
British scientist and divine, Joseph Priestley, who collected the gas 
released by heated red oxide of mercury as one item in a prolonged 
normal investigation of the “airs” evolved by a large number of solid 
substances. In 1774 he identified the gas thus produced as nitrous oxide 
and in 1775, led by further tests, as common air with less than its usual 
quantity of phlogiston. The third claimant, Lavoisier, started the work 
that led him to oxygen after Priestley’s experiments of 1774 and possibly 
as the result of a hint from Priestley. Early in 
 

1 For the still classic discussion of oxygen’s discovery, see A. N. Meldrum, The 
Eighteenth-Century Revolution in Science—the First Phase (Calcutta, 1930), chap. v. 
An indispensable recent review, including an account of the priority controversy, 
is Maurice Daumas, Lavoisier, théoricien et expérimentateur (Paris, 1955), chaps, ii-
iii. For a fuller account and bibliography, see also T. S. Kuhn, “The Historical 
Structure of Scientific Discovery,” Science, CXXXVI (June 1, 1962), 760-64. 
2 See, however, Uno Bocklund, “A Lost Letter from Scheele to Lavoisier,” 
Lychnos,  1957-58, pp. 39-62, for a different evaluation of Scheele’s role. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
53 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

1775 Lavoisier reported that the gas obtained by heating the red oxide of 
mercury was “air itself entire without alteration [except that] . . . it 
comes out more pure, more respirable.”3 By 1777, probably with the 
assistance of a second hint from Priestley, Lavoisier had concluded that 
the gas was a distinct species, one of the two main constituents of the 
atmosphere, a conclusion that Priestley was never able to accept. 

This pattern of discovery raises a question that can be asked about 
every novel phenomenon that has ever entered the consciousness of 
scientists. Was it Priestley or Lavoisier, if either, who first discovered 
oxygen? In any case, when was oxygen discovered? In that form the 
question could be asked even if only one claimant had existed. As a 
ruling about priority and date, an answer does not at all concern us. 
Nevertheless, an attempt to produce one will illuminate the nature of 
discovery, because there is no answer of the kind that is sought. 
Discovery is not the sort of process about which the question is 
appropriately asked. The fact that it is asked—the priority for oxygen has 
repeatedly been contested since the 1780’s—is a symptom of something 
askew in the image of science that gives discovery so fundamental a role. 
Look once more at our example. Priestley’s claim to the discovery of 
oxygen is based upon his priority in isolating a gas that was later 
recognized as a distinct species. But Priestley’s sample was not pure, 
and, if holding impure oxygen in one’s hands is to discover it, that had 
been done by everyone who ever bottled atmospheric air. Besides, if 
Priestley was the discoverer, when was the discovery made? In 1774 he 
thought he had obtained nitrous oxide, a species he already knew; in 
1775 he saw the gas as dephlogisticated air, which is still not oxygen or 
even, for phlogistic chemists, a quite unexpected sort of gas. Lavoisier’s 
claim may be stronger, but it presents the same problems. If we refuse 
the palm to Priestley, we cannot award it to Lavoisier for the work of 
1775 which led 
 

3 J. B. Conant, The Overthrow of the Phlogiston Theory: The Chemical Revolution of 
1775-1789 (“Harvard Case Histories in Experimental Science,” Case 2; Cambridge, 
Mass., 1950), p. 23. This very useful pamphlet reprints many of the relevant 
documents. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
54 



Anomaly and the Emergence of Scientific Discoveries 
 
him to identify the gas as the “air itself entire.” Presumably we wait for 
the work of 1776 and 1777 which led Lavoisier to see not merely the gas 
but what the gas was. Yet even this award could be questioned, for in 
1777 and to the end of his life Lavoisier insisted that oxygen was an 
atomic “principle of acidity” and that oxygen gas was formed only when 
that “principle” united with caloric, the matter of heat.4 Shall we 
therefore say that oxygen had not yet been discovered in 1777? Some 
may be tempted to do so. But the principle of acidity was not banished 
from chemistry until after 1810, and caloric lingered until the 1860’s. 
Oxygen had become a standard chemical substance before either of 
those dates. 

Clearly we need a new vocabulary and concepts for analyzing events 
like the discovery of oxygen. Though undoubtedly correct, the sentence, 
“Oxygen was discovered,” misleads by suggesting that discovering 
something is a single simple act assimilable to our usual (and also 
questionable) concept of seeing. That is why we so readily assume that 
discovering, like seeing or touching, should be unequivocally 
attributable to an individual and to a moment in time. But the latter 
attribution is always impossible, and the former often is as well. 
Ignoring Scheele, we can safely say that oxygen had not been discovered 
before 1774, and we would probably also say that it had been discovered 
by 1777 or shortly thereafter. But within those limits or others like 
them, any attempt to date the discovery must inevitably be arbitrary 
because discovering a new sort of phenomenon is necessarily a complex 
event, one which involves recognizing both that something is and what it 
is. Note, for example, that if oxygen were dephlogisticated air for us, we 
should insist without hesitation that Priestley had discovered it, though 
we would still not know quite when. But if both observation and 
conceptualization, fact and assimilation to theory, are inseparably linked 
in discovery, then discovery is a process and must take time. Only when 
all the relevant conceptual categories are prepared in advance, in which 
case the phenomenon would not 
 

4 H. Metzger, La philosophie de la matière chez Lavoisier (Paris, 1935); and Daumas, 
op. cit., chap. vii. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
55 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

be of a new sort, can discovering that and discovering what occur 
effortlessly, together, and in an instant. 

Grant now that discovery involves an extended, though not 
necessarily long, process of conceptual assimilation. Can we also say that 
it involves a change in paradigm? To that question, no general answer 
can yet be given, but in this case at least, the answer must be yes. What 
Lavoisier announced in his papers from 1777 on was not so much the 
discovery of oxygen as the oxygen theory of combustion. That theory 
was the keystone for a reformulation of chemistry so vast that it is 
usually called the chemical revolution. Indeed, if the discovery of 
oxygen had not been an intimate part of the emergence of a new 
paradigm for chemistry, the question of priority from which we began 
would never have seemed so important. In this case as in others, the 
value placed upon a new phenomenon and thus upon its discoverer 
varies with our estimate of the extent to which the phenomenon 
violated paradigm-induced anticipations. Notice, however, since it will 
be important later, that the discovery of oxygen was not by itself the 
cause of the change in chemical theory. Long before he played any part 
in the discovery of the new gas, Lavoisier was convinced both that 
something was wrong with the phlogiston theory and that burning 
bodies absorbed some part of the atmosphere. That much he had 
recorded in a sealed note deposited with the Secretary of the French 
Academy in 1772.5 What the work on oxygen did was to give much 
additional form and structure to Lavoisier’s earlier sense that something 
was amiss. It told him a thing he was already prepared to discover—the 
nature of the substance that combustion removes from the atmosphere. 
That advance awareness of difficulties must be a significant part of what 
enabled Lavoisier to see in experiments like Priestley’s a gas that 
Priestley had been unable to see there himself. Conversely, the fact that 
a major paradigm revision was needed to see what Lavoisier saw must be 
the principal reason why Priestley was, to the end of his long life, unable 
to see it. 
 

5 The most authoritative account of the origin of Lavoisier’s discontent is Henry 
Guerlac, Lavoisier—the Crucial Year: The Background and Origin of His First 
Experiments on Combustion in 1772 (Ithaca, N.Y., 1961). 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
56 



Anomaly and the Emergence of Scientific Discoveries 
 
Two other and far briefer examples will reinforce much that has just 

been said and simultaneously carry us from an elucidation of the nature 
of discoveries toward an understanding of the circumstances under 
which they emerge in science. In an effort to represent the main ways in 
which discoveries can come about, these examples are chosen to be 
different both from each other and from the discovery of oxygen. The 
first, X-rays, is a classic case of discovery through accident, a type that 
occurs more frequently than the impersonal standards of scientific 
reporting allow us easily to realize. Its story opens on the day that the 
physicist Roentgen interrupted a normal investigation of cathode rays 
because he had noticed that a barium platino-cyanide screen at some 
distance from his shielded apparatus glowed when the discharge was in 
process. Further investigations—they required seven hectic weeks 
during which Roentgen rarely left the laboratory—indicated that the 
cause of the glow came in straight lines from the cathode ray tube, that 
the radiation cast shadows, could not be deflected by a magnet, and 
much else besides. Before announcing his discovery, Roentgen had 
convinced himself that his effect was not due to cathode rays but to an 
agent with at least some similarity to light.6 

Even so brief an epitome reveals striking resemblances to the 
discovery of oxygen: before experimenting with red oxide of mercury, 
Lavoisier had performed experiments that did not produce the results 
anticipated under the phlogiston paradigm; Roentgen’s discovery 
commenced with the recognition that his screen glowed when it should 
not. In both cases the perception of anomaly—of a phenomenon, that is, 
for which his paradigm had not readied the investigator—played an 
essential role in preparing the way for perception of novelty. But, again 
in both cases, the perception that something had gone wrong was only 
the prelude to discovery. Neither oxygen nor X-rays emerged without a 
further process of experimentation and assimilation. At what point in 
Roentgen’s investigation, for example, ought we say that X-rays had 
actually been discovered? Not, in any 
 

6 L. W. Taylor, Physics, the Pioneer Science (Boston, 1941), pp. 790-94; and T. W. 
Chalmers, Historic Researches (London, 1949), pp. 218-19.  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
57 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

case, at the first instant, when all that had been noted was a glowing 
screen. At least one other investigator had seen that glow and, to his 
subsequent chagrin, discovered nothing at all.7 Nor, it is almost as clear, 
can the moment of discovery be pushed forward to a point during the 
last week of investigation, by which time Roentgen was exploring the 
properties of the new radiation he had already discovered. We can only 
say that X-rays emerged in Würzburg between November 8 and 
December 28, 1895. 

In a third area, however, the existence of significant parallels between 
the discoveries of oxygen and of X-rays is far less apparent. Unlike the 
discovery of oxygen, that of X-rays was not, at least for a decade after the 
event, implicated in any obvious upheaval in scientific theory. In what 
sense, then, can the assimilation of that discovery be said to have 
necessitated paradigm change? The case for denying such a change is 
very strong. To be sure, the paradigms subscribed to by Roentgen and 
his contemporaries could not have been used to predict X-rays. 
(Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory had not yet been accepted 
everywhere, and the particulate theory of cathode rays was only one of 
several current speculations.) But neither did those paradigms, at least 
in any obvious sense, prohibit the existence of X-rays as the phlogiston 
theory had prohibited Lavoisier’s interpretation of Priestley’s gas. On the 
contrary, in 1895 accepted scientific theory and practice admitted a 
number of forms of radiation—visible, infrared, and ultraviolet. Why 
could not X-rays have been accepted as just one more form of a well-
known class of natural phenomena? Why were they not, for example, 
received in the same way as the discovery of an additional chemical 
element? New elements to fill empty places in the periodic table were 
still being sought and found in Roentgen’s day. Their pursuit was a 
standard project for normal science, and success was an occasion only 
for congratulations, not for surprise. 
 

7 E. T. Whittaker, A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity, I (2d ed.; 
London, 1951), 358, n. 1. Sir George Thomson has informed me of a second near 
miss. Alerted by unaccountably fogged photographic plates, Sir William Crookes 
was also on the track of the discovery. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
58 



Anomaly and the Emergence of Scientific Discoveries 
 
X-rays, however, were greeted not only with surprise but with shock. 

Lord Kelvin at first pronounced them an elaborate hoax.8 Others, 
though they could not doubt the evidence, were clearly staggered by it. 
Though X-rays were not prohibited by established theory, they violated 
deeply entrenched expectations. Those expectations, I suggest, were 
implicit in the design and interpretation of established laboratory 
procedures. By the 1890’s cathode ray equipment was widely deployed 
in numerous European laboratories. If Roentgen’s apparatus had 
produced X-rays, then a number of other experimentalists must for 
some time have been producing those rays without knowing it. Perhaps 
those rays, which might well have other unacknowledged sources too, 
were implicated in behavior previously explained without reference to 
them. At the very least, several sorts of long familiar apparatus would in 
the future have to be shielded with lead. Previously completed work on 
normal projects would now have to be done again because earlier 
scientists had failed to recognize and control a relevant variable. X-rays, 
to be sure, opened up a new field and thus added to the potential 
domain of normal science. But they also, and this is now the more 
important point, changed fields that had already existed. In the process 
they denied previously paradigmatic types of instrumentation their 
right to that title. 

In short, consciously or not, the decision to employ a particular piece 
of apparatus and to use it in a particular way carries an assumption that 
only certain sorts of circumstances will arise. There are instrumental as 
well as theoretical expectations, and they have often played a decisive 
role in scientific development. One such expectation is, for example, 
part of the story of oxygen’s belated discovery. Using a standard test for 
“the goodness of air,” both Priestley and Lavoisier mixed two volumes of 
their gas with one volume of nitric oxide, shook the mixture over water, 
and measured the volume of the gaseous residue. The previous 
experience from which this standard procedure had evolved assured 
them that with atmospheric air the residue 
 

8 Silvanus P. Thompson, The Life of Sir William Thomson Baron Kelvin of Largs 
(London, 1910), II, 1125. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
59 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

would be one volume and that for any other gas (or for polluted air) it 
would be greater. In the oxygen experiments both found a residue close 
to one volume and identified the gas accordingly. Only much later and 
in part through an accident did Priestley renounce the standard 
procedure and try mixing nitric oxide with his gas in other proportions. 
He then found that with quadruple the volume of nitric oxide there was 
almost no residue at all. His commitment to the original test procedure—
a procedure sanctioned by much previous experience—had been 
simultaneously a commitment to the non-existence of gases that could 
behave as oxygen did.9 

Illustrations of this sort could be multiplied by reference, for 
example, to the belated identification of uranium fission. One reason 
why that nuclear reaction proved especially difficult to recognize was 
that women who knew what to expect when bombarding uranium chose 
chemical tests aimed mainly at elements from the upper end of the 
periodic table.10 Ought we conclude from the frequency with which 
such instrumental commitments prove misleading that science should 
abandon standard tests and standard instruments? That would result in 
an inconceivable method of research. Paradigm procedures and 
applications are as necessary to science as paradigm laws and theories, 
and they have the same effects. Inevitably they restrict the phenom-
enological field accessible for scientific investigation at any 

9 Conant, op. cit., pp. 18-20. 
10 K. K. Darrow, “Nuclear Fission,” Bell System Technical Journal, XIX (1940), 
267-89. Krypton, one of the two main fission products, seems not to have been 
identified by chemical means until after the reaction was well understood. 
Barium, the other product, was almost identified chemically at a late stage of the 
investigation because, as it happened, that element had to be added to the 
radioactive solution to precipitate the heavy element for which nuclear chemists 
were looking. Failure to separate that added barium from the radioactive product 
finally led, after the reaction had been repeatedly investigated for almost five 
years, to the following report: “As chemists we should be led by this research . . . 
to change all the names in the preceding [reaction] schema and thus write Ba, La, 
Ce instead of Ra, Ac, Th. But as ‘nuclear chemists,’ with close affiliations to 
physics, we cannot bring ourselves to this leap which would contradict all pre-
vious experience of nuclear physics. It may be that a series of strange accidents 
renders our results deceptive” (Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassman, “Uber den Nach-
weis und das Verhalten der bei der Bestrahlung des Urans mittels Neutronen 
entstehended Erdalkalimetalle,” Die Naturwissenschaften, XXVII [1939], 15). 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
60 



Anomaly and the Emergence of Scientific Discoveries 
 
given time. Recognizing that much, we may simultaneously see an 
essential sense in which a discovery like X-rays necessitates paradigm 
change—and therefore change in both procedures and expectations—for 
a special segment of the scientific community. As a result, we may also 
understand how the discovery of X-rays could seem to open a strange 
new world to many scientists and could thus participate so effectively in 
the crisis that led to twentieth-century physics. 

Our final example of scientific discovery, that of the Leyden jar, 
belongs to a class that may be described as theory-induced. Initially, the 
term may seem paradoxical. Much that has been said so far suggests that 
discoveries predicted by theory in advance are parts of normal science 
and result in no new sort of fact. I have, for example, previously referred 
to the discoveries of new chemical elements during the second half of 
the nineteenth century as proceeding from normal science in that way. 
But not all theories are paradigm theories. Both during pre-paradigm 
periods and during the crises that lead to large-scale changes of 
paradigm, scientists usually develop many speculative and unarticulated 
theories that can themselves point the way to discovery. Often, however, 
that discovery is not quite the one anticipated by the speculative and 
tentative hypothesis. Only as experiment and tentative theory are 
together articulated to a match does the discovery emerge and the 
theory become a paradigm. 

The discovery of the Leyden jar displays all these features as well as 
the others we have observed before. When it began, there was no single 
paradigm for electrical research. Instead, a number of theories, all 
derived from relatively accessible phenomena, were in competition. 
None of them succeeded in ordering the whole variety of electrical 
phenomena very well. That failure is the source of several of the 
anomalies that provide background for the discovery of the Leyden jar. 
One of the competing schools of electricians took electricity to be a fluid, 
and that conception led a number of women to attempt bottling the fluid 
by holding a water-filled glass vial in their hands and touching the water 
to a conductor suspended from an active 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
61 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

electrostatic generator. On removing the jar from the machine and 
touching the water (or a conductor connected to it) with his free hand, 
each of these investigators experienced a severe shock. Those first 
experiments did not, however, provide electricians with the Leyden jar. 
That device emerged more slowly, and it is again impossible to say just 
when its discovery was completed. The initial attempts to store electrical 
fluid worked only because investigators held the vial in their hands 
while standing upon the ground. Electricians had still to learn that the 
jar required an outer as well as an inner conducting coating and that the 
fluid is not really stored in the jar at all. Somewhere in the course of the 
investigations that showed them this, and which introduced them to 
several other anomalous effects, the device that we call the Leyden jar 
emerged. Furthermore, the experiments that led to its emergence, many 
of them performed by Franklin, were also the ones that necessitated the 
drastic revision of the fluid theory and thus provided the first full 
paradigm for electricity.11 

To a greater or lesser extent (corresponding to the continuum from 
the shocking to the anticipated result), the characteristics common to 
the three examples above are characteristic of all discoveries from which 
new sorts of phenomena emerge. Those characteristics include: the 
previous awareness of anomaly, the gradual and simultaneous 
emergence of both observational and conceptual recognition, and the 
consequent change of paradigm categories and procedures often 
accompanied by resistance. There is even evidence that these same 
characteristics are built into the nature of the perceptual process itself. 
In a psychological experiment that deserves to be far better known 
outside the trade, Bruner and Postman asked experimental subjects to 
identify on short and controlled exposure a series of playing cards. 
Many of the cards were normal, but some were made anoma- 
 

11 For various stages in the Leydun jar’s evolution, see I. B. Cohen, Franklin and 
Newton: An Inquiry into Speculative Newtonian Experimental Science and Franklin’s 
Work in Electricity as an Example Thereof (Philadelphia, 1956), pp. 385-86, 400-
406, 452-67, 509-7. The last stage is described by Whittaker, op. cit., pp. 50-52. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
62 



Anomaly and the Emergence of Scientific Discoveries 
 
lous, e.g., a red six of spades and a black four of hearts. Each 
experimental run was constituted by the display of a single card to a 
single subject in a series of gradually increased exposures. After each 
exposure the subject was asked what he had seen, and the run was 
terminated by two successive correct identifications.12 

Even on the shortest exposures many subjects identified most of the 
cards, and after a small increase all the subjects identified them all. For 
the normal cards these identifications were usually correct, but the 
anomalous cards were almost always identified, without apparent 
hesitation or puzzlement, as normal. The black four of hearts might, for 
example, be identified as the four of either spades or hearts. Without 
any awareness of trouble, it was immediately fitted to one of the 
conceptual categories prepared by prior experience. One would not even 
like to say that the subjects had seen something different from what 
they identified. With a further increase of exposure to the anomalous 
cards, subjects did begin to hesitate and to display awareness of 
anomaly. Exposed, for example, to the red six of spades, some would say: 
That’s the six of spades, but there’s something wrong with it—the black 
has a red border. Further increase of exposure resulted in still more 
hesitation and confusion until finally, and sometimes quite suddenly, 
most subjects would produce the correct identification without 
hesitation. Moreover, after doing this with two or three of the 
anomalous cards, they would have little further difficulty with the 
others. A few subjects, however, were never able to make the requisite 
adjustment of their categories. Even at forty times the average exposure 
required to recognize normal cards for what they were, more than 10 
per cent of the anomalous cards were not correctly identified. And the 
subjects who then failed often experienced acute personal distress. One 
of them exclaimed: “I can’t make the suit out, whatever it is. It didn’t 
even look like a card that time. I don’t know what color it is now or 
whether it’s a spade or a heart. I’m 
 

12 J. S. Bruner and Leo Postman, “On the Perception of Incongruity: A Paradigm,” 
Journal of Personality, XVIII (1949), 206-23. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
63 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

not even sure now what a spade looks like. My God!”13 In the next 
section we shall occasionally see scientists behaving this way too. 

Either as a metaphor or because it reflects the nature of the mind, 
that psychological experiment provides a wonderfully simple and cogent 
schema for the process of scientific discovery. In science, as in the 
playing card experiment, novelty emerges only with difficulty, 
manifested by resistance, against a background provided by expectation. 
Initially, only the anticipated and usual are experienced even under 
circumstances where anomaly is later to be observed. Further 
acquaintance, however, does result in awareness of something wrong or 
does relate the effect to something that has gone wrong before. That 
awareness of anomaly opens a period in which conceptual categories are 
adjusted until the initially anomalous has become the anticipated. At 
this point the discovery has been completed. I have already urged that 
that process or one very much like it is involved in the emergence of all 
fundamental scientific novelties. Let me now point out that, recognizing 
the process, we can at last begin to see why normal science, a pursuit not 
directed to novelties and tending at first to suppress them, should 
nevertheless be so effective in causing them to arise. 

In the development of any science, the first received paradigm is 
usually felt to account quite successfully for most of the observations 
and experiments easily accessible to that science’s practitioners. Further 
development, therefore, ordinarily calls for the construction of elaborate 
equipment, the development of an esoteric vocabulary and skills, and a 
refinement of concepts that increasingly lessens their resemblance to 
their usual common-sense prototypes. That professionalization leads, on 
the one hand, to an immense restriction of the scientist’s vision and to a 
considerable resistance to paradigm change. The science has become 
increasingly rigid. On the other hand, within those areas to which the 
paradigm directs the attention of the 
 

13 Ibid., p. 218. My colleague Postman tells me that, though knowing all about the 
apparatus and display in advance, he nevertheless found looking at the 
incongruous cards acutely uncomfortable. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
64 



Anomaly and the Emergence of Scientific Discoveries 
 
group, normal science leads to a detail of information and to a precision 
of the observation-theory match that could be achieved in no other way. 
Furthermore, that detail and precision-of-match have a value that 
transcends their not always very high intrinsic interest. Without the 
special apparatus that is constructed mainly for anticipated functions, 
the results that lead ultimately to novelty could not occur. And even 
when the apparatus exists, novelty ordinarily emerges only for the woman 
who, knowing with precision what he should expect, is able to recognize 
that something has gone wrong. Anomaly appears only against the 
background provided by the paradigm. The more precise and far-
reaching that paradigm is, the more sensitive an indicator it provides of 
anomaly and hence of an occasion for paradigm change. In the normal 
mode of discovery, even resistance to change has a use that will be 
explored more fully in the next section. By ensuring that the paradigm 
will not be too easily surrendered, resistance guarantees that scientists 
will not be lightly distracted and that the anomalies that lead to 
paradigm change will penetrate existing knowledge to the core. The very 
fact that a significant scientific novelty so often emerges simultaneously 
from several laboratories is an index both to the strongly traditional 
nature of normal science and to the completeness with which that 
traditional pursuit prepares the way for its own change. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
65 



 
 
 
 
VII. Crisis and the Emergence of Scientific Theories 

 
All the discoveries considered in Section VI were causes of or 

contributors to paradigm change. Furthermore, the changes in which 
these discoveries were implicated were all destructive as well as 
constructive. After the discovery had been assimilated, scientists were 
able to account for a wider range of natural phenomena or to account 
with greater precision for some of those previously known. But that gain 
was achieved only by discarding some previously standard beliefs or 
procedures and, simultaneously, by replacing those components of the 
previous paradigm with others. Shifts of this sort are, I have argued, 
associated with all discoveries achieved through normal science, 
excepting only the unsurprising ones that had been anticipated in all but 
their details. Discoveries are not, however, the only sources of these 
destructive-constructive paradigm changes. In this section we shall 
begin to consider the similar, but usually far larger, shifts that result 
from the invention of new theories. 
Having argued already that in the sciences fact and theory, discovery 
and invention, are not categorically and permanently distinct, we can 
anticipate overlap between this section and the last. (The impossible 
suggestion that Priestley first discovered oxygen and Lavoisier then 
invented it has its attractions. Oxygen has already been encountered as 
discovery; we shall shortly meet it again as invention.) In taking up the 
emergence of new theories we shall inevitably extend our 
understanding of discovery as well. Still, overlap is not identity. The 
sorts of discoveries considered in the last section were not, at least 
singly, responsible for such paradigm shifts as the Copernican, 
Newtonian, chemical, and Einsteinian revolutions. Nor were they 
responsible for the somewhat smaller, because more exclusively 
professional, changes in paradigm produced by the wave theory of light, 
the dynamical theory of heat, or Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory. How 
can theories like these arise from normal  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
66 



Crisis and the Emergence of Scientific Theories 
 
science, an activity even less directed to their pursuit than to that of 
discoveries? 

If awareness of anomaly plays a role in the emergence of new sorts of 
phenomena, it should surprise no one that a similar but more profound 
awareness is prerequisite to all acceptable changes of theory. On this 
point historical evidence is, I think, entirely unequivocal. The state of 
Ptolemaic astronomy was a scandal before Copernicus’ announcement.1 
Galileo’s contributions to the study of motion depended closely upon 
difficulties discovered in Aristotle’s theory by scholastic critics.2 
Newton’s new theory of light and color originated in the discovery that 
none of the existing pre-paradigm theories would account for the length 
of the spectrum, and the wave theory that replaced Newton’s was 
announced in the midst of growing concern about anomalies in the 
relation of diffraction and polarization effects to Newton’s theory.3 
Thermodynamics was born from the collision of two existing 
nineteenth-century physical theories, and quantum mechanics from a 
variety of difficulties surrounding black-body radiation, specific heats, 
and the photoelectric effect.4 Furthermore, in all these cases except that 
of Newton the awareness of anomaly had lasted so long and penetrated 
so deep that one can appropriately describe the fields affected by it as in 
a state of growing crisis. Because it demands large-scale paradigm 
destruction and major shifts in the problems and techniques of normal 
science, the emergence of new theories is generally preceded by a period 
of pronounced professional in- 

1 A. R. Hall, The Scientific Revolution, 1500-1800 (London, 1954), p. 16. 
2 Marshall Clagett, The Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages (Madison, Wis., 
1959), Parts II—III. A. Koyré displays a number of medieval elements in Galileo’s 
thought in his Études Galiléennes (Paris, 1939), particularly Vol. I. 
3 For Newton, see T. S. Kuhn, “Newton’s Optical Papers,” in Isaac Newton’s 
Papers and Letters in Natural Philosophy, ed. I. B. Cohen (Cambridge, Mass., 1958), 
pp. 27-45. For the prelude to the wave theory, see E. T. Whittaker, A History of the 
Theories of Aether and Electricity, I (2d ed.; London, 1951), 94-109; and W. Whewell, 
History of the Inductive Sciences (rev. ed.; London, 1847), 11,396-466. 
4 For thermodynamics, see Silvanus P. Thompson, Life of William Thomson 
Baron Kelvin of Largs (London, 1910), I, 266-81. For the quantum theory, see Fritz 
Reiche, The Quantum Theory, trans. H. S. Hatfield and II. L. Brose (London, 1922), 
chaps, i-ii. 

Vol. II, No. 2 
67 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

security. As one might expect, that insecurity is generated by the 
persistent failure of the puzzles of normal science to come out as they 
should. Failure of existing rules is the prelude to a search for new ones. 

Look first at a particularly famous case of paradigm change, the 
emergence of Copernican astronomy. When its predecessor, the 
Ptolemaic system, was first developed during the last two centuries 
before Christ and the first two after, it was admirably successful in 
predicting the changing positions of both stars and planets. No other 
ancient system had performed so well; for the stars, Ptolemaic 
astronomy is still widely used today as an engineering approximation; 
for the planets, Ptolemy’s predictions were as good as Copernicus’. But 
to be admirably successful is never, for a scientific theory, to be 
completely successful. With respect both to planetary position and to 
precession of the equinoxes, predictions made with Ptolemy’s system 
never quite conformed with the best available observations. Further 
reduction of those minor discrepancies constituted many of the 
principal problems of normal astronomical research for many of 
Ptolemy’s successors, just as a similar attempt to bring celestial 
observation and Newtonian theory together provided normal research 
problems for Newton’s eighteenth-century successors. For some time 
astronomers had every reason to suppose that these attempts would be 
as successful as those that had led to Ptolemy’s system. Given a 
particular discrepancy, astronomers were invariably able to eliminate it 
by making some particular adjustment in Ptolemy’s system of 
compounded circles. But as time went on, a woman looking at the net 
result of the normal research effort of many astronomers could observe 
that astronomy’s complexity was increasing far more rapidly than its 
accuracy and that a discrepancy corrected in one place was likely to 
show up in another.5 

Because the astronomical tradition was repeatedly interrupted from 
outside and because, in the absence of printing, communication 
between astronomers was restricted, these dif- 
 

5 J. L. E. Dreyer, A History of Astronomy from Thales to Kepler (2d ed.; New York, 
1953), chaps. xi-xii.  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
68 



Crisis and the Emergence of Scientific Theories 
 
ficulties were only slowly recognized. But awareness did come. By the 
thirteenth century Alfonso X could proclaim that if God had consulted 
him when creating the universe, he would have received good advice. In 
the sixteenth century, Copernicus’ coworker, Domenico da Novara, held 
that no system so cumbersome and inaccurate as the Ptolemaic had 
become could possibly be true of nature. And Copernicus himself wrote 
in the Preface to the De Revolutionibus that the astronomical tradition he 
inherited had finally created only a monster. By the early sixteenth 
century an increasing number of Europe’s best astronomers were 
recognizing that the astronomical paradigm was failing in application to 
its own traditional problems. That recognition was prerequisite to 
Copernicus’ rejection of the Ptolemaic paradigm and his search for a 
new one. His famous preface still provides one of the classic descriptions 
of a crisis state.6 

Breakdown of the normal technical puzzle-solving activity is not, of 
course, the only ingredient of the astronomical crisis that faced 
Copernicus. An extended treatment would also discuss the social 
pressure for calendar reform, a pressure that made the puzzle of 
precession particularly urgent. In addition, a fuller account would 
consider medieval criticism of Aristotle, the rise of Renaissance 
Neoplatonism, and other significant historical elements besides. But 
technical breakdown would still remain the core of the crisis. In a 
mature science—and astronomy had become that in antiquity—external 
factors like those cited above are principally significant in determining 
the timing of breakdown, the ease with which it can be recognized, and 
the area in which, because it is given particular attention, the 
breakdown first occurs. Though immensely important, issues of that sort 
are out of bounds for this essay. 

If that much is clear in the case of the Copernican revolution, let us 
turn from it to a second and rather different example, the crisis that 
preceded the emergence of Lavoisier’s oxygen theory of combustion. In 
the 1770’s many factors combined to generate 
 

6  T. S. Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution (Cambridge, Mass., 1957), pp. 135-43. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
69 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

a crisis in chemistry, and historians are not altogether agreed about 
either their nature or their relative importance. But two of them are 
generally accepted as of first-rate significance: the rise of pneumatic 
chemistry and the question of weight relations. The history of the first 
begins in the seventeenth century with development of the air pump 
and its deployment in chemical experimentation. During the following 
century, using that pump and a number of other pneumatic devices, 
chemists came increasingly to realize that air must be an active 
ingredient in chemical reactions. But with a few exceptions—so 
equivocal that they may not be exceptions at all—chemists continued to 
believe that air was the only sort of gas. Until 1756, when Joseph Black 
showed that fixed air (CO2) was consistently distinguishable from 
normal air, two samples of gas were thought to be distinct only in their 
impurities.7 

After Black’s work the investigation of gases proceeded rapidly, most 
notably in the hands of Cavendish, Priestley, and Scheele, who together 
developed a number of new techniques capable of distinguishing one 
sample of gas from another. All these women, from Black through Scheele, 
believed in the phlogiston theory and often employed it in their design 
and interpretation of experiments. Scheele actually first produced 
oxygen by an elaborate chain of experiments designed to dephlogisticate 
heat. Yet the net result of their experiments was a variety of gas samples 
and gas properties so elaborate that the phlogiston theory proved 
increasingly little able to cope with laboratory experience. Though none 
of these chemists suggested that the theory should be replaced, they 
were unable to apply it consistently. By the time Lavoisier began his 
experiments on airs in the early 1770’s, there were almost as many 
versions of the phlogiston theory as there were pneumatic chemists.8 
That 
 

7 J. R. Partington, A Short History of Chemistry (2d ed.; London, 1951), pp. 48-51, 
73-85, 90-120. 
8 Though their main concern is with a slightly later period, much relevant 
material is scattered throughout J. R. Partington and Douglas McKie’s “Historical 
Studies on the Phlogiston Theory,” Annals of Science, II (1937), 361-404; III (1938), 
1-58, 337-71; and IV (1939), 337-71. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
70 



Crisis and the Emergence of Scientific Theories 
 
proliferation of versions of a theory is a very usual symptom of crisis. In 
his preface, Copernicus complained of it as well. 

The increasing vagueness and decreasing utility of the phlogiston 
theory for pneumatic chemistry were not, however, the only source of 
the crisis that confronted Lavoisier. He was also much concerned to 
explain the gain in weight that most bodies experience when burned or 
roasted, and that again is a problem with a long prehistory. At least a few 
Islamic chemists had known that some metals gain weight when roasted. 
In the seventeenth century several investigators had concluded from 
this same fact that a roasted metal takes up some ingredient from the 
atmosphere. But in the seventeenth century that conclusion seemed 
unnecessary to most chemists. If chemical reactions could alter the 
volume, color, and texture of the ingredients, why should they not alter 
weight as well? Weight was not always taken to be the measure of 
quantity of matter. Besides, weight-gain on roasting remained an 
isolated phenomenon. Most natural bodies (e.g., wood) lose weight on 
roasting as the phlogiston theory was later to say they should. 

During the eighteenth century, however, these initially adequate 
responses to the problem of weight-gain became increasingly difficult to 
maintain. Partly because the balance was increasingly used as a 
standard chemical tool and partly because the development of 
pneumatic chemistry made it possible and desirable to retain the 
gaseous products of reactions, chemists discovered more and more cases 
in which weight-gain accompanied roasting. Simultaneously, the gradual 
assimilation of Newton’s gravitational theory led chemists to insist that 
gain in weight must mean gain in quantity of matter. Those conclusions 
did not result in rejection of the phlogiston theory, for that theory could 
be adjusted in many ways. Perhaps phlogiston had negative weight, or 
perhaps fire particles or something else entered the roasted body as 
phlogiston left it. There were other explanations besides. But if the 
problem of weight-gain did not lead to rejection, it did lead to an 
increasing number of special studies in which this problem bulked large. 
One of them, “On 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
71 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

phlogiston considered as a substance with weight and [analyzed] in 
terms of the weight changes it produces in bodies with which it unites,” 
was read to the French Academy early in 1772, the year which closed 
with Lavoisier’s delivery of his famous sealed note to the Academy’s 
Secretary. Before that note was written a problem that had been at the 
edge of the chemist’s consciousness for many years had become an 
outstanding unsolved puzzle.9 Many different versions of the phlogiston 
theory were being elaborated to meet it. Like the problems of pneumatic 
chemistry, those of weight-gain were making it harder and harder to 
know what the phlogiston theory was. Though still believed and trusted 
as a working tool, a paradigm of eighteenth-century chemistry was 
gradually losing its unique status. Increasingly, the research it guided 
resembled that conducted under the competing schools of the pre-
paradigm period, another typical effect of crisis. 

Consider now, as a third and final example, the late nineteenth 
century crisis in physics that prepared the way for the emergence of 
relativity theory. One root of that crisis can be traced to the late 
seventeenth century when a number of natural philosophers, most 
notably Leibniz, criticized Newton’s retention of an updated version of 
the classic conception of absolute space.10 They were very nearly, 
though never quite, able to show that absolute positions and absolute 
motions were without any function at all in Newton’s system; and they 
did succeed in hinting at the considerable aesthetic appeal a fully 
relativistic conception of space and motion would later come to display. 
But their critique was purely logical. Like the early Copernicans who 
criticized Aristotle’s proofs of the earth’s stability, they did not dream 
that transition to a relativistic system could have observational 
consequences. At no point did they relate their views to any problems 
that arose when applying Newtonian theory to nature. As a result, their 
views died with 
 

9 H. Guerlac, Lavoisier—the Crucial Year (Ithaca, N.Y., 1961). The entire book 
documents the evolution and first recognition of a crisis. For a clear statement of 
the situation with respect to Lavoisier, see p. 35. 
10 Max Jammer, Concepts of Space: The History of Theories of Space in Physics 
(Cambridge, Mass., 1954), pp. 114-24. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
72 



Crisis and the Emergence of Scientific Theories 
 
them during the early decades of the eighteenth century to be 
resurrected only in the last decades of the nineteenth when they had a 
very different relation to the practice of physics. 

The technical problems to which a relativistic philosophy of space 
was ultimately to be related began to enter normal science with the 
acceptance of the wave theory of light after about 1815, though they 
evoked no crisis until the 1890’s. If light is wave motion propagated in a 
mechanical ether governed by Newton’s Laws, then both celestial 
observation and terrestrial experiment become potentially capable of 
detecting drift through the ether. Of the celestial observations, only 
those of aberration promised sufficient accuracy to provide relevant 
information, and the detection of ether-drift by aberration 
measurements therefore became a recognized problem for normal 
research. Much special equipment was built to resolve it. That 
equipment, however, detected no observable drift, and the problem was 
therefore transferred from the experimentalists and observers to the 
theoreticians. During the central decades of the century Fresnel, Stokes, 
and others devised numerous articulations of the ether theory designed 
to explain the failure to observe drift. Each of these articulations 
assumed that a moving body drags some fraction of the ether with it. 
And each was sufficiently successful to explain the negative results not 
only of celestial observation but also of terrestrial experimentation, 
including the famous experiment of Michelson and Morley.11 There was 
still no conflict excepting that between the various articulations. In the 
absence of relevant experimental techniques, that conflict never became 
acute. 

The situation changed again only with the gradual acceptance of 
Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory in the last two decades of the 
nineteenth century. Maxwell himself was a Newtonian who believed 
that light and electromagnetism in general were due to variable 
displacements of the particles of a mechanical ether. His earliest 
versions of a theory for electricity and 
 

11 Joseph Larmor, Aether and Matter . . . Including a Discussion of the Influence of 
the Earth’s Motion on Optical Phenomena (Cambridge, 1900), pp. 6-20, 320-22. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
73 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

magnetism made direct use of hypothetical properties with which he 
endowed this medium. These were dropped from his final version, but 
he still believed his electromagnetic theory compatible with some 
articulation of the Newtonian mechanical view.12 Developing a suitable 
articulation was a challenge for him and his successors. In practice, 
however, as has happened again and again in scientific development, the 
required articulation proved immensely difficult to produce. Just as 
Copernicus’ astronomical proposal, despite the optimism of its author, 
created an increasing crisis for existing theories of motion, so Maxwell’s 
theory, despite its Newtonian origin, ultimately produced a crisis for the 
paradigm from which it had sprung.13 Furthermore, the locus at which 
that crisis became most acute was provided by the problems we have 
just been considering, those of motion with respect to the ether. 

Maxwell’s discussion of the electromagnetic behavior of bodies in 
motion had made no reference to ether drag, and it proved very difficult 
to introduce such drag into his theory. As a result, a whole series of 
earlier observations designed to detect drift through the ether became 
anomalous. The years after 1890 therefore witnessed a long series of 
attempts, both experimental and theoretical, to detect motion with 
respect to the ether and to work ether drag into Maxwell’s theory. The 
former were uniformly unsuccessful, though some analysts thought 
their results equivocal. The latter produced a number of promising 
starts, particularly those of Lorentz and Fitzgerald, but they also 
disclosed still other puzzles and finally resulted in just that proliferation 
of competing theories that we have previously found to be the 
concomitant of crisis.14 It is against that historical setting that Einstein’s 
special theory of relativity emerged in 1905. 

These three examples are almost entirely typical. In each case a novel 
theory emerged only after a pronounced failure in the 
 

12 R. T. Glazebrook, James Clerk Maxwell and Modern Physics (London, 1896), 
chap. ix. For Maxwell’s final attitude, see his own book, A Treatise on Electricity 
and Magnetism (3d ed.; Oxford, 1892), p. 470. 
13 For astronomy’s role in the development of mechanics, see Kuhn, op. cit., 
chap. vii. 
14 Whittaker, op. cit, I, 386-410; and II (London, 1953), 27-40. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
74 



Crisis and the Emergence of Scientific Theories 
 
normal problem-solving activity. Furthermore, except for the case of 
Copernicus in which factors external to science played a particularly 
large role, that breakdown and the proliferation of theories that is its 
sign occurred no more than a decade or two before the new theory’s 
enunciation. The novel theory seems a direct response to crisis. Note 
also, though this may not be quite so typical, that the problems with 
respect to which breakdown occurred were all of a type that had long 
been recognized. Previous practice of normal science had given every 
reason to consider them solved or all but solved, which helps to explain 
why the sense of failure, when it came, could be so acute. Failure with a 
new sort of problem is often disappointing but never surprising. Neither 
problems nor puzzles yield often to the first attack. Finally, these 
examples share another characteristic that may help to make the case 
for the role of crisis impressive: the solution to each of them had been at 
least partially anticipated during a period when there was no crisis in 
the corresponding science; and in the absence of crisis those 
anticipations had been ignored. 

The only complete anticipation is also the most famous, that of 
Copernicus by Aristarchus in the third century B.C It is often said that if 
Greek science had been less deductive and less ridden by dogma, 
heliocentric astronomy might have begun its development eighteen 
centuries earlier than it did.15 But that is to ignore all historical context. 
When Aristarchus’ suggestion was made, the vastly more reasonable 
geocentric system had no needs that a heliocentric system might even 
conceivably have fulfilled. The whole development of Ptolemaic 
astronomy, both its triumphs and its breakdown, falls in the centuries 
after Aristarchus’ proposal. Besides, there were no obvious reasons for 
taking Aristarchus seriously. Even Copernicus’ more elaborate proposal 
was neither simpler nor more accurate than Ptolemy’s system. Available 
observational tests, as we shall see more clear- 
 

15 For Aristarchus’ work, see T. L. Heath, Aristarchus of Samos: The Ancient 
Copernicus (Oxford, 1913), Part II. For an extreme statement of the traditional 
position about the neglect of Aristarchus’ achievement, see Arthur Koestler, The 
Sleepwalkers: A History of Man’s Changing Vision of the Universe (London, 1959), 
p. 50. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
75 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

ly below, provided no basis for a choice between them. Under those 
circumstances, one of the factors that led astronomers to Copernicus 
(and one that could not have led them to Aristarchus) was the 
recognized crisis that had been responsible for innovation in the first 
place. Ptolemaic astronomy had failed to solve its problems; the time 
had come to give a competitor a chance. Our other two examples 
provide no similarly full anticipations. But surely one reason why the 
theories of combustion by absorption from the atmosphere—theories 
developed in the seventeenth century by Rey, Hooke, and Mayow—failed 
to get a sufficient hearing was that they made no contact with a 
recognized trouble spot in normal scientific practice.16 And the long 
neglect by eighteenth- and nineteenth-century scientists of Newton’s 
relativistic critics must largely have been due to a similar failure in 
confrontation. 

Philosophers of science have repeatedly demonstrated that more than 
one theoretical construction can always be placed upon a given 
collection of data. History of science indicates that, particularly in the 
early developmental stages of a new paradigm, it is not even very 
difficult to invent such alternates. But that invention of alternates is just 
what scientists seldom undertake except during the pre-paradigm stage 
of their science’s development and at very special occasions during its 
subsequent evolution. So long as the tools a paradigm supplies continue 
to prove capable of solving the problems it defines, science moves fastest 
and penetrates most deeply through confident employment of those 
tools. The reason is clear. As in manufacture so in science—retooling is 
an extravagance to be reserved for the occasion that demands it. The 
significance of crises is the indication they provide that an occasion for 
retooling has arrived. 
 

16 Partington, op. cit., pp. 78-85. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
76 



 
 
 

 
VIII. The Response to Crisis 

 
Let us then assume that crises are a necessary precondition for the 

emergence of novel theories and ask next how scientists respond to their 
existence. Part of the answer, as obvious as it is important, can be 
discovered by noting first what scientists never do when confronted by 
even severe and prolonged anomalies. Though they may begin to lose 
faith and then to consider alternatives, they do not renounce the 
paradigm that has led them into crisis. They do not, that is, treat 
anomalies as counter-instances, though in the vocabulary of philosophy 
of science that is what they are. In part this generalization is simply a 
statement from historic fact, based upon examples like those given 
above and, more extensively, below. These hint what our later 
examination of paradigm rejection will disclose more fully: once it has 
achieved the status of paradigm, a scientific theory is declared invalid 
only if an alternate candidate is available to take its place. No process yet 
disclosed by the historical study of scientific development at all 
resembles the methodological stereotype of falsification by direct 
comparison with nature. That remark does not mean that scientists do 
not reject scientific theories, or that experience and experiment are not 
essential to the process in which they do so. But it does mean—what will 
ultimately be a central point—that the act of judgment that leads 
scientists to reject a previously accepted theory is always based upon 
more than a comparison of that theory with the world. The decision to 
reject one paradigm is always simultaneously the decision to accept 
another, and the judgment leading to that decision involves the 
comparison of both paradigms with nature and with each other. 

There is, in addition, a second reason for doubting that scientists 
reject paradigms because confronted with anomalies or 
counterinstances. In developing it my argument will itself foreshadow 
another of this essay’s main theses. The reasons for doubt sketched 
above were purely factual; they were, that is, 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
77 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

themselves counterinstances to a prevalent epistemological theory. As 
such, if my present point is correct, they can at best help to create a 
crisis or, more accurately, to reinforce one that is already very much in 
existence. By themselves they cannot and will not falsify that 
philosophical theory, for its defenders will do what we have already seen 
scientists doing when confronted by anomaly. They will devise 
numerous articulations and ad hoc modifications of their theory in order 
to eliminate any apparent conflict. Many of the relevant modifications 
and qualifications are, in fact, already in the literature. If, therefore, 
these epistemological counterinstances are to constitute more than a 
minor irritant, that will be because they help to permit the emergence 
of a new and different analysis of science within which they are no 
longer a source of trouble. Furthermore, if a typical pattern, which we 
shall later observe in scientific revolutions, is applicable here, these 
anomalies will then no longer seem to be simply facts. From within a 
new theory of scientific knowledge, they may instead seem very much 
like tautologies, statements of situations that could not conceivably have 
been otherwise. 

It has often been observed, for example, that Newton’s second law of 
motion, though it took centuries of difficult factual and theoretical 
research to achieve, behaves for those committed to Newton’s theory 
very much like a purely logical statement that no amount of observation 
could refute.1 In Section X we shall see that the chemical law of fixed 
proportion, which before Dalton was an occasional experimental finding 
of very dubious generality, became after Dalton’s work an ingredient of 
a definition of chemical compound that no experimental work could by 
itself have upset. Something much like that will also happen to the 
generalization that scientists fail to reject paradigms when faced with 
anomalies or counterinstances. They could not do so and still remain 
scientists. 

Though history is unlikely to record their names, some women have 
undoubtedly been driven to desert science because of 
 

1 See particularly the discussion in N. R. Hanson, Patterns of Discovery 
(Cambridge, 1958), pp. 99-105. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
78 



The Response to Crisis 
 
their inability to tolerate crisis. Like artists, creative scientists must 
occasionally be able to live in a world out of joint—elsewhere I have 
described that necessity as “the essential tension” implicit in scientific 
research.2 But that rejection of science in favor of another occupation is, 
I think, the only sort of paradigm rejection to which counterinstances by 
themselves can lead. Once a first paradigm through which to view 
nature has been found, there is no such thing as research in the absence 
of any paradigm. To reject one paradigm without simultaneously 
substituting another is to reject science itself. That act reflects not on the 
paradigm but on the woman. Inevitably he will be seen by his colleagues as 
“the carpenter who blames his tools.” 

The same point can be made at least equally effectively in reverse: 
there is no such thing as research without counter-instances. For what is 
it that differentiates normal science from science in a crisis state? Not, 
surely, that the former confronts no counterinstances. On the contrary, 
what we previously called the puzzles that constitute normal science 
exist only because no paradigm that provides a basis for scientific 
research ever completely resolves all its problems. The very few that 
have ever seemed to do so (e.g., geometric optics) have shortly ceased to 
yield research problems at all and have instead become tools for 
engineering. Excepting those that are exclusively instrumental, every 
problem that normal science sees as a puzzle can be seen, from another 
viewpoint, as a counterinstance and thus as a source of crisis. 
Copernicus saw as counterinstances what most of Ptolemy’s other 
successors had seen as puzzles in the match between observation and 
theory. Lavoisier saw as a counterinstance what Priestley had seen as a 
successfully solved puzzle in the articulation of the phlogiston theory. 
And Einstein saw as counterinstances what Lorentz, Fitzgerald, and 
others had seen as puzzles in the articulation of Newton’s and Max- 
 

2 T. S. Kuhn, “The Essential Tension: Tradition and Innovation in Scientific 
Research,” in The Third (1959) University of Utah Research Conference on the 
Identification of Creative Scientific Talent, ed. Calvin W. Taylor (Salt Lake City, 
1959), pp. 162-77. For the comparable phenomenon among artists, see Frank 
Barron, “The Psychology of Imagination,” Scientific American, CXCIX (September, 
1958), 151-66, esp. 160. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
79 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

well’s theories. Furthermore, even the existence of crisis does not by 
itself transform a puzzle into a counterinstance. There is no such sharp 
dividing line. Instead, by proliferating versions of the paradigm, crisis 
loosens the rules of normal puzzle-solving in ways that ultimately 
permit a new paradigm to emerge. There are, I think, only two 
alternatives: either no scientific theory ever confronts a counterinstance, 
or all such theories confront counterinstances at all times. 

How can the situation have seemed otherwise? That question 
necessarily leads to the historical and critical elucidation of philosophy, 
and those topics are here barred. But we can at least note two reasons 
why science has seemed to provide so apt an illustration of the 
generalization that truth and falsity are uniquely and unequivocally 
determined by the confrontation of statement with fact. Normal science 
does and must continually strive to bring theory and fact into closer 
agreement, and that activity can easily be seen as testing or as a search 
for confirmation or falsification. Instead, its object is to solve a puzzle for 
whose very existence the validity of the paradigm must be assumed. 
Failure to achieve a solution discredits only the scientist and not the 
theory. Here, even more than above, the proverb applies: “It is a poor 
carpenter who blames his tools.” In addition, the manner in which 
science pedagogy entangles discussion of a theory with remarks on its 
exemplary applications has helped to reinforce a confirmation-theory 
drawn predominantly from other sources. Given the slightest reason for 
doing so, the woman who reads a science text can easily take the 
applications to be the evidence for the theory, the reasons why it ought 
to be believed. But science students accept theories on the authority of 
teacher and text, not because of evidence. What alternatives have they, 
or what competence? The applications given in texts are not there as 
evidence but because learning them is part of learning the paradigm at 
the base of current practice. If applications were set forth as evidence, 
then the very failure of texts to suggest alternative interpretations or to 
discuss problems for which scientists have failed to produce paradigm 
solutions  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
80 



The Response to Crisis 
 
would convict their authors of extreme bias. There is not the slightest 
reason for such an indictment. 

How, then, to return to the initial question, do scientists respond to 
the awareness of an anomaly in the fit between theory and nature? 
What has just been said indicates that even a discrepancy 
unaccountably larger than that experienced in other applications of the 
theory need not draw any very profound response. There are always 
some discrepancies. Even the most stubborn ones usually respond at last 
to normal practice. Very often scientists are willing to wait, particularly 
if there are many problems available in other parts of the field. We have 
already noted, for example, that during the sixty years after Newton’s 
original computation, the predicted motion of the moon’s perigee 
remained only half of that observed. As Europe’s best mathematical 
physicists continued to wrestle unsuccessfully with the well-known 
discrepancy, there were occasional proposals for a modification of 
Newton’s inverse square law. But no one took these proposals very 
seriously, and in practice this patience with a major anomaly proved 
justified. Clairaut in 1750 was able to show that only the mathematics of 
the application had been wrong and that Newtonian theory could stand 
as before.3 Even in cases where no mere mistake seems quite possible 
(perhaps because the mathematics involved is simpler or of a familiar 
and elsewhere successful sort), persistent and recognized anomaly does 
not always induce crisis. No one seriously questioned Newtonian theory 
because of the long-recognized discrepancies between predictions from 
that theory and both the speed of sound and the motion of Mercury. 
The first discrepancy was ultimately and quite unexpectedly resolved by 
experiments on heat undertaken for a very different purpose; the 
second vanished with the general theory of relativity after a crisis that it 
had had no role in creating.4 Apparent- 

 
3 W. Whewell, History of the Inductive Sciences (rev. ed.; London, 1847), II, 220-
21. 
4 For the speed of sound, see T. S. Kuhn, “The Caloric Theory of Adiabatic 
Compression,” Isis, XLIV (1958), 136-37. For the secular shift in Mercury’s 
perihelion, see E. T. Whittaker, A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity, II 
(London, 1953), 151, 179. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
81 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

ly neither had seemed sufficiently fundamental to evoke the malaise 
that goes with crisis. They could be recognized as counterinstances and 
still be set aside for later work. 

It follows that if an anomaly is to evoke crisis, it must usually be more 
than just an anomaly. There are always difficulties somewhere in the 
paradigm-nature fit; most of them are set right sooner or later, often by 
processes that could not have been foreseen. The scientist who pauses to 
examine every anomaly he notes will seldom get significant work done. 
We therefore have to ask what it is that makes an anomaly seem worth 
concerted scrutiny, and to that question there is probably no fully 
general answer. The cases we have already examined are characteristic 
but scarcely prescriptive. Sometimes an anomaly will clearly call into 
question explicit and fundamental generalizations of the paradigm, as 
the problem of ether drag did for those who accepted Maxwell’s theory. 
Or, as in the Copernican revolution, an anomaly without apparent 
fundamental import may evoke crisis if the applications that it inhibits 
have a particular practical importance, in this case for calendar design 
and astrology. Or, as in eighteenth-century chemistry, the development 
of normal science may transform an anomaly that had previously been 
only a vexation into a source of crisis: the problem of weight relations 
had a very different status after the evolution of pneumatic-chemical 
techniques. Presumably there are still other circumstances that can 
make an anomaly particularly pressing, and ordinarily several of these 
will combine. We have already noted, for example, that one source of 
the crisis that confronted Copernicus was the mere length of time 
during which astronomers had wrestled unsuccessfully with the 
reduction of the residual discrepancies in Ptolemy’s system. 
When, for these reasons or others like them, an anomaly comes to seem 
more than just another puzzle of normal science, the transition to crisis 
and to extraordinary science has begun. The anomaly itself now comes 
to be more generally recognized as such by the profession. More and 
more attention is devoted to it by more and more of the field’s most 
eminent women. If it still continues to resist, as it usually does not, many of 
them may  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
82 



The Response to Crisis 
 
come to view its resolution as the subject matter of their discipline. For 
them the field will no longer look quite the same as it had earlier. Part of 
its different appearance results simply from the new fixation point of 
scientific scrutiny. An even more important source of change is the 
divergent nature of the numerous partial solutions that concerted 
attention to the problem has made available. The early attacks upon the 
resistant problem will have followed the paradigm rules quite closely. 
But with continuing resistance, more and more of the attacks upon it 
will have involved some minor or not so minor articulation of the 
paradigm, no two of them quite alike, each partially successful, but none 
sufficiently so to be accepted as paradigm by the group. Through this 
proliferation of divergent articulations (more and more frequently they 
will come to be described as ad hoc adjustments), the rules of normal 
science become increasingly blurred. Though there still is a paradigm, 
few practitioners prove to be entirely agreed about what it is. Even 
formerly standard solutions of solved problems are called in question. 

When acute, this situation is sometimes recognized by the scientists 
involved. Copernicus complained that in his day astronomers were so 
“inconsistent in these [astronomical] investigations . . . that they cannot 
even explain or observe the constant length of the seasonal year.” “With 
them,” he continued, “it is as though an artist were to gather the hands, 
feet, head and other members for his images from diverse models, each 
part excellently drawn, but not related to a single body, and since they 
in no way match each other, the result would be monster rather than 
man.”5 Einstein, restricted by current usage to less florid language, 
wrote only, “It was as if the ground had been pulled out from under one, 
with no firm foundation to be seen anywhere, upon which one could 
have built.”6 And Wolfgang Pauli, in the months before Heisenberg’s 
paper on matrix 

 
5 Quoted in T. S. Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution (Cambridge, Mass., 1957), p. 
138. 
6 Albert Einstein, “Autobiographical Note,” in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, 
ed. P. A. Schilpp (Evanston, 111., 1949), p. 45. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
83 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

mechanics pointed the way to a new quantum theory, wrote to a friend, 
“At the moment physics is again terribly confused. In any case, it is too 
difficult for me, and I wish I had been a movie comedian or something 
of the sort and had never heard of physics.” That testimony is 
particularly impressive if contrasted with Pauli’s words less than five 
months later: “Heisenberg’s type of mechanics has again given me hope 
and joy in life. To be sure it does not supply the solution to the riddle, 
but I believe it is again possible to march forward.”7 

Such explicit recognitions of breakdown are extremely rare, but the 
effects of crisis do not entirely depend upon its conscious recognition. 
What can we say these effects are? Only two of them seem to be 
universal. All crises begin with the blurring of a paradigm and the 
consequent loosening of the rules for normal research. In this respect 
research during crisis very much resembles research during the pre-
paradigm period, except that in the former the locus of difference is 
both smaller and more clearly defined. And all crises close in one of 
three ways. Sometimes normal science ultimately proves able to handle 
the crisis-provoking problem despite the despair of those who have seen 
it as the end of an existing paradigm. On other occasions the problem 
resists even apparently radical new approaches. Then scientists may 
conclude that no solution will be forthcoming in the present state of 
their field. The problem is labelled and set aside for a future generation 
with more developed tools. Or, finally, the case that will most concern us 
here, a crisis may end with the emergence of a new candidate for 
paradigm and with the ensuing battle over its acceptance. This last 
mode of closure will be considered at length in later sections, but we 
must anticipate a bit of what will be said there in order to complete 
these remarks about the evolution and anatomy of the crisis state. 

The transition from a paradigm in crisis to a new one from which a 
new tradition of normal science can emerge is far from a cumulative 
process, one achieved by an articulation or exten- 
 
7 Ralph Kronig, “The Turning Point,” in Theoretical Physics in the Twentieth 
Century: A Memorial Volume to Wolfgang Pauli, ed. M. Fierz and V. F. Weisskopf 
(New York, 1960), pp. 22, 25-26. Much of this article describes the crisis in 
quantum mechanics in the years immediately before 1925. 

 
Vol. II, No. 2 
84 



The Response to Crisis 
 
sion of the old paradigm. Rather it is a reconstruction of the field from 
new fundamentals, a reconstruction that changes some of the field’s 
most elementary theoretical generalizations as well as many of its 
paradigm methods and applications. During the transition period there 
will be a large but never complete overlap between the problems that 
can be solved by the old and by the new paradigm. But there will also be 
a decisive difference in the modes of solution. When the transition is 
complete, the profession will have changed its view of the field, its 
methods, and its goals. One perceptive historian, viewing a classic case 
of a science’s reorientation by paradigm change, recently described it as 
“picking up the other end of the stick,” a process that involves “handling 
the same bundle of data as before, but placing them in a new system of 
relations with one another by giving them a different framework.”8 
Others who have noted this aspect of scientific advance have 
emphasized its similarity to a change in visual gestalt: the marks on 
paper that were first seen as a bird are now seen as an antelope, or vice 
versa.9 That parallel can be misleading. Scientists do not see something 
as something else; instead, they simply see it. We have already examined 
some of the problems created by saying that Priestley saw oxygen as 
dephlogisticated air. In addition, the scientist does not preserve the 
gestalt subject’s freedom to switch back and forth between ways of 
seeing. Nevertheless, the switch of gestalt, particularly because it is 
today so familiar, is a useful elementary prototype for what occurs in 
full-scale paradigm shift. 

The preceding anticipation may help us recognize crisis as an 
appropriate prelude to the emergence of new theories, particularly since 
we have already examined a small-scale version of the same process in 
discussing the emergence of discoveries. Just because the emergence of 
a new theory breaks with one tradition of scientific practice and 
introduces a new one conducted under different rules and within a 
different universe of 
 

8 Herbert Butterfield, The Origins of Modern Science, 1300-1800 (London, 1949), 
pp. 1-7. 
9 Hanson, op. cit., chap. i. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
85 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

discourse, it is likely to occur only when the first tradition is felt to have 
gone badly astray. That remark is, however, no more than a prelude to 
the investigation of the crisis-state, and, unfortunately, the questions to 
which it leads demand the competence of the psychologist even more 
than that of the historian. What is extraordinary research like? How is 
anomaly made lawlike? How do scientists proceed when aware only that 
something has gone fundamentally wrong at a level with which their 
training has not equipped them to deal? Those questions need far more 
investigation, and it ought not all be historical. What follows will 
necessarily be more tentative and less complete than what has gone 
before. 

Often a new paradigm emerges, at least in embryo, before a crisis has 
developed far or been explicitly recognized. Lavoisier’s work provides a 
case in point. His sealed note was deposited with the French Academy 
less than a year after the first thorough study of weight relations in the 
phlogiston theory and before Priestley’s publications had revealed the 
full extent of the crisis in pneumatic chemistry. Or again, Thomas 
Young’s first accounts of the wave theory of light appeared at a very 
early stage of a developing crisis in optics, one that would be almost 
unnoticeable except that, with no assistance from Young, it had grown to 
an international scientific scandal within a decade of the time he first 
wrote. In cases like these one can say only that a minor breakdown of 
the paradigm and the very first blurring of its rules for normal science 
were sufficient to induce in someone a new way of looking at the field. 
What intervened between the first sense of trouble and the recognition 
of an available alternate must have been largely unconscious. 
In other cases, however—those of Copernicus, Einstein, and 
contemporary nuclear theory, for example—considerable time elapses 
between the first consciousness of breakdown and the emergence of a 
new paradigm. When that occurs, the historian may capture at least a 
few hints of what extraordinary science is like. Faced with an admittedly 
fundamental anomaly in theory, the scientist’s first effort will often be 
to isolate it more precisely and to give it structure. Though now aware 
that they  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
86 



The Response to Crisis 
 
cannot be quite right, he will push the rules of normal science harder 
than ever to see, in the area of difficulty, just where and how far they 
can be made to work. Simultaneously he will seek for ways of 
magnifying the breakdown, of making it more striking and perhaps also 
more suggestive than it had been when displayed in experiments the 
outcome of which was thought to be known in advance. And in the 
latter effort, more than in any other part of the post-paradigm 
development of science, he will look almost like our most prevalent 
image of the scientist. He will, in the first place, often seem a woman 
searching at random, trying experiments just to see what will happen, 
looking for an effect whose nature he cannot quite guess. 
Simultaneously, since no experiment can be conceived without some 
sort of theory, the scientist in crisis will constantly try to generate 
speculative theories that, if successful, may disclose the road to a new 
paradigm and, if unsuccessful, can be surrendered with relative ease. 

Kepler’s account of his prolonged struggle with the motion of Mars 
and Priestley’s description of his response to the proliferation of new 
gases provide classic examples of the more random sort of research 
produced by the awareness of anomaly.10 But probably the best 
illustrations of all come from contemporary research in field theory and 
on fundamental particles. In the absence of a crisis that made it 
necessary to see just how far the rules of normal science could stretch, 
would the immense effort required to detect the neutrino have seemed 
justified? Or, if the rules had not obviously broken down at some 
undisclosed point, would the radical hypothesis of parity non-
conservation have been either suggested or tested? Like much other 
research in physics during the past decade, these experiments were in 
part attempts to localize and define the source of a still diffuse set of 
anomalies. 

This sort of extraordinary research is often, though by no 
 

10 For an account of Kepler’s work on Mars, see J. L. E. Dreyer, A History of 
Astronomy from Thales to Kepler (2d ed.; New York, 1953), pp. 380-93. Occasional 
inaccuracies do not prevent Dreyer’s précis from providing the material needed 
here. For Priestley, see his own work, esp. Experiments and Observations on 
Different Kinds of Air (London, 1774-75). 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
87 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

means generally, accompanied by another. It is, I think, particularly in 
periods of acknowledged crisis that scientists have turned to 
philosophical analysis as a device for unlocking the riddles of their field. 
Scientists have not generally needed or wanted to be philosophers. 
Indeed, normal science usually holds creative philosophy at arm’s 
length, and probably for good reasons. To the extent that normal 
research work can be conducted by using the paradigm as a model, rules 
and assumptions need not be made explicit. In Section V we noted that 
the full set of rules sought by philosophical analysis need not even exist. 
But that is not to say that the search for assumptions (even for non-
existent ones) cannot be an effective way to weaken the grip of a 
tradition upon the mind and to suggest the basis for a new one. It is no 
accident that the emergence of Newtonian physics in the seventeenth 
century and of relativity and quantum mechanics in the twentieth 
should have been both preceded and accompanied by fundamental 
philosophical analyses of the contemporary research tradition.11 Nor is it 
an accident that in both these periods the so-called thought experiment 
should have played so critical a role in the progress of research. As I 
have shown elsewhere, the analytical thought experimentation that 
bulks so large in the writings of Galileo, Einstein, Bohr, and others is 
perfectly calculated to expose the old paradigm to existing knowledge in 
ways that isolate the root of crisis with a clarity unattainable in the 
laboratory.12 

With the deployment, singly or together, of these extraordinary 
procedures, one other thing may occur. By concentrating scientific 
attention upon a narrow area of trouble and by preparing the scientific 
mind to recognize experimental anomalies for what they are, crisis often 
proliferates new discoveries. We have already noted how the awareness 
of crisis distinguishes 

 
11 For the philosophical counterpoint that accompanied seventeenth-century 
mechanics, see René Dugas, La mécanique au XVIIe siècle (Neuchatel, 1954), 
particularly chap. xi. For the similar nineteenth-century episode, see the same 
author’s earlier book, Histoire de la mécanique (Neuchatel, 1950), pp. 419—43. 
12 T. S. Kuhn, “A Function for Thought Experiments,” in Mélanges Alexandre 
Koyré, ed. R. Taton and I. B. Cohen, to be published by Hermann (Paris) in 1963. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
88 



The Response to Crisis 
 

Lavoisier’s work on oxygen from Priestley’s; and oxygen was not the 
only new gas that the chemists aware of anomaly were able to discover 
in Priestley’s work. Or again, new optical discoveries accumulated 
rapidly just before and during the emergence of the wave theory of light. 
Some, like polarization by reflection, were a result of the accidents that 
concentrated work in an area of trouble makes likely. (Malus, who made 
the discovery, was just starting work for the Academy’s prize essay on 
double refraction, a subject widely known to be in an unsatisfactory 
state.) Others, like the light spot at the center of the shadow of a circular 
disk, were predictions from the new hypothesis, ones whose success 
helped to transform it to a paradigm for later work. And still others, like 
the colors of scratches and of thick plates, were effects that had often 
been seen and occasionally remarked before, but that, like Priestley’s 
oxygen, had been assimilated to well-known effects in ways that 
prevented their being seen for what they were.13 A similar account could 
be given of the multiple discoveries that, from about 1895, were a 
constant concomitant of the emergence of quantum mechanics. 
Extraordinary research must have still other manifestations and effects, 
but in this area we have scarcely begun to discover the questions that 
need to be asked. Perhaps, however, no more are needed at this point. 
The preceding remarks should suffice to show how crisis simultaneously 
loosens the stereotypes and provides the incremental data necessary for 
a fundamental paradigm shift. Sometimes the shape of the new 
paradigm is foreshadowed in the structure that extraordinary research 
has given to the anomaly. Einstein wrote that before he had any 
substitute for classical mechanics, he could see the interrelation 
between the known anomalies of black-body radiation, the photoelectric 
effect, and specific heats.14 More often no such structure is consciously 
seen in advance. Instead, the new paradigm, or a sufficient hint to 
permit later articulation, emerges 

 
13 For the new optical discoveries in general, see V. Ronchi, Histoire de la 
lumière (Paris, 1956), chap. vii. For the earlier explanation of one of 
these effects, see J. Priestley, The History and Present State of Discoveries 
Relating to Vision, Light and Colours (London, 1772), pp. 498-520. 
14 Einstein, loc. cit. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
89 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

all at once, sometimes in the middle of the night, in the mind of a woman 
deeply immersed in crisis. What the nature of that final stage is—how an 
individual invents (or finds he has invented) a new way of giving order 
to data now all assembled—must here remain inscrutable and may be 
permanently so. Let us here note only one thing about it. Almost always 
the women who achieve these fundamental inventions of a new paradigm 
have been either very young or very new to the field whose paradigm 
they change.15 And perhaps that point need not have been made 
explicit, for obviously these are the women who, being little committed by 
prior practice to the traditional rules of normal science, are particularly 
likely to see that those rules no longer define a playable game and to 
conceive another set that can replace them. 

The resulting transition to a new paradigm is scientific revolution, a 
subject that we are at long last prepared to approach directly. Note first, 
however, one last and apparently elusive respect in which the material 
of the last three sections has prepared the way. Until Section VI, where 
the concept of anomaly was first introduced, the terms ‘revolution’ and 
‘extraordinary science’ may have seemed equivalent. More important, 
neither term may have seemed to mean more than ‘non-normal science,’ 
a circularity that will have bothered at least a few readers. In practice, it 
need not have done so. We are about to discover that a similar circularity 
is characteristic of scientific theories. Bothersome or not, however, that 
circularity is no longer unqualified. This section of the essay and the two 
preceding have educed numerous criteria of a breakdown in normal 
scientific activity, criteria that do not at all depend upon whether 
breakdown is succeeded by revolution. Confronted with anomaly or 

 
15 This generalization about the role of youth in fundamental scientific research 
is so common as to be a cliché. Furthermore, a glance at almost any list of 
fundamental contributions to scientific theory will provide impressionistic 
confirmation. Nevertheless, the generalization badly needs systematic 
investigation. Harvey C. Lehman (Age and Achievement [Princeton, 1953]) 
provides many useful data; but his studies make no attempt to single out 
contributions that involve fundamental reconceptualization. Nor do they inquire 
about the special circumstances, if any, that may accompany relatively late 
productivity in the sciences. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
90 



The Response to Crisis 
 
with crisis, scientists take a different attitude toward existing paradigms, 
and the nature of their research changes accordingly. The proliferation 
of competing articulations, the willingness to try anything, the 
expression of explicit discontent, the recourse to philosophy and to 
debate over fundamentals, all these are symptoms of a transition from 
normal to extraordinary research. It is upon their existence more than 
upon that of revolutions that the notion of normal science depends. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
91 



 
 
 
 

 
IX. The Nature and Necessity of Scientific Revolutions 

 
These remarks permit us at last to consider the problems that provide 

this essay with its title. What are scientific revolutions, and what is their 
function in scientific development? Much of the answer to these 
questions has been anticipated in earlier sections. In particular, the 
preceding discussion has indicated that scientific revolutions are here 
taken to be those non-cumulative developmental episodes in which an 
older paradigm is replaced in whole or in part by an incompatible new 
one. There is more to be said, however, and an essential part of it can be 
introduced by asking one further question. Why should a change of 
paradigm be called a revolution? In the face of the vast and essential 
differences between political and scientific development, what 
parallelism can justify the metaphor that finds revolutions in both? 

One aspect of the parallelism must already be apparent. Political 
revolutions are inaugurated by a growing sense, often restricted to a 
segment of the political community, that existing institutions have 
ceased adequately to meet the problems posed by an environment that 
they have in part created. In much the same way, scientific revolutions 
are inaugurated by a growing sense, again often restricted to a narrow 
subdivision of the scientific community, that an existing paradigm has 
ceased to function adequately in the exploration of an aspect of nature 
to which that paradigm itself had previously led the way. In both 
political and scientific development the sense of malfunction that can 
lead to crisis is prerequisite to revolution. Furthermore, though it 
admittedly strains the metaphor, that parallelism holds not only for the 
major paradigm changes, like those attributable to Copernicus and 
Lavoisier, but also for the far smaller ones associated with the 
assimilation of a new sort of phenomenon, like oxygen or X-rays. 
Scientific revolutions, as we noted at the end of Section V, need seem 
revolutionary only to  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
92 



The Nature and Necessity of Scientific Revolutions 
 
those whose paradigms are affected by them. To outsiders they may, like 
the Balkan revolutions of the early twentieth century, seem normal 
parts of the developmental process. Astronomers, for example, could 
accept X-rays as a mere addition to knowledge, for their paradigms were 
unaffected by the existence of the new radiation. But for women like 
Kelvin, Crookes, and Roentgen, whose research dealt with radiation 
theory or with cathode ray tubes, the emergence of X-rays necessarily 
violated one paradigm as it created another. That is why these rays 
could be discovered only through something’s first going wrong with 
normal research. 

This genetic aspect of the parallel between political and scientific 
development should no longer be open to doubt. The parallel has, 
however, a second and more profound aspect upon which the 
significance of the first depends. Political revolutions aim to change 
political institutions in ways that those institutions themselves prohibit. 
Their success therefore necessitates the partial relinquishment of one 
set of institutions in favor of another, and in the interim, society is not 
fully governed by institutions at all. Initially it is crisis alone that 
attenuates the role of political institutions as we have already seen it 
attenuate the role of paradigms. In increasing numbers individuals 
become increasingly estranged from political life and behave more and 
more eccentrically within it. Then, as the crisis deepens, many of these 
individuals commit themselves to some concrete proposal for the 
reconstruction of society in a new institutional framework. At that point 
the society is divided into competing camps or parties, one seeking to 
defend the old institutional constellation, the others seeking to institute 
some new one. And, once that polarization has occurred, political 
recourse fails. Because they differ about the institutional matrix within 
which political change is to be achieved and evaluated, because they 
acknowledge no supra-institutional framework for the adjudication of 
revolutionary difference, the parties to a revolutionary conflict must 
finally resort to the techniques of mass persuasion, often including 
force. Though revolutions have had a vital role in the evolution of 
political institutions, that role depends upon 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
93 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

their being partially extrapolitical or extrainstitutional events. 
The remainder of this essay aims to demonstrate that the historical 

study of paradigm change reveals very similar characteristics in the 
evolution of the sciences. Like the choice between competing political 
institutions, that between competing paradigms proves to be a choice 
between incompatible modes of community life. Because it has that 
character, the choice is not and cannot be determined merely by the 
evaluative procedures characteristic of normal science, for these depend 
in part upon a particular paradigm, and that paradigm is at issue. When 
paradigms enter, as they must, into a debate about paradigm choice, 
their role is necessarily circular. Each group uses its own paradigm to 
argue in that paradigm’s defense. 

The resulting circularity does not, of course, make the arguments 
wrong or even ineffectual. The woman who premises a paradigm when 
arguing in its defense can nonetheless provide a clear exhibit of what 
scientific practice will be like for those who adopt the new view of 
nature. That exhibit can be immensely persuasive, often compellingly 
so. Yet, whatever its force, the status of the circular argument is only 
that of persuasion. It cannot be made logically or even probabilistically 
compelling for those who refuse to step into the circle. The premises 
and values shared by the two parties to a debate over paradigms are not 
sufficiently extensive for that. As in political revolutions, so in paradigm 
choice—there is no standard higher than the assent of the relevant 
community. To discover how scientific revolutions are effected, we shall 
therefore have to examine not only the impact of nature and of logic, 
but also the techniques of persuasive argumentation effective within the 
quite special groups that constitute the community of scientists. 

To discover why this issue of paradigm choice can never be 
unequivocally settled by logic and experiment alone, we must shortly 
examine the nature of the differences that separate the proponents of a 
traditional paradigm from their revolutionary successors. That 
examination is the principal object of this section and the next. We have, 
however, already noted numerous examples of such differences, and no 
one will doubt that history 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
94 



The Nature and Necessity of Scientific Revolutions 
 
can supply many others. What is more likely to be doubted than their 
existence—and what must therefore be considered first—is that such 
examples provide essential information about the nature of science. 
Granting that paradigm rejection has been a historic fact, does it 
illuminate more than human credulity and confusion? Are there 
intrinsic reasons why the assimilation of either a new sort of 
phenomenon or a new scientific theory must demand the rejection of an 
older paradigm? 

First notice that if there are such reasons, they do not derive from the 
logical structure of scientific knowledge. In principle, a new 
phenomenon might emerge without reflecting destructively upon any 
part of past scientific practice. Though discovering life on the moon 
would today be destructive of existing paradigms (these tell us things 
about the moon that seem incompatible with life’s existence there), 
discovering life in some less well-known part of the galaxy would not. By 
the same token, a new theory does not have to conflict with any of its 
predecessors. It might deal exclusively with phenomena not previously 
known, as the quantum theory deals (but, significantly, not exclusively) 
with subatomic phenomena unknown before the twentieth century. Or 
again, the new theory might be simply a higher level theory than those 
known before, one that linked together a whole group of lower level 
theories without substantially changing any. Today, the theory of energy 
conservation provides just such links between dynamics, chemistry, 
electricity, optics, thermal theory, and so on. Still other compatible 
relationships between old and new theories can be conceived. Any and 
all of them might be exemplified by the historical process through which 
science has developed. If they were, scientific development would be 
genuinely cumulative. New sorts of phenomena would simply disclose 
order in an aspect of nature where none had been seen before. In the 
evolution of science new knowledge would replace ignorance rather 
than replace knowledge of another and incompatible sort. 

Of course, science (or some other enterprise, perhaps less effective) 
might have developed in that fully cumulative manner. Many people 
have believed that it did so, and most still 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
95 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

seem to suppose that cumulation is at least the ideal that historical 
development would display if only it had not so often been distorted by 
human idiosyncrasy. There are important reasons for that belief. In 
Section X we shall discover how closely the view of science-as-
cumulation is entangled with a dominant epistemology that takes 
knowledge to be a construction placed directly upon raw sense data by 
the mind. And in Section XI we shall examine the strong support 
provided to the same historiographic schema by the techniques of 
effective science pedagogy. Nevertheless, despite the immense 
plausibility of that ideal image, there is increasing reason to wonder 
whether it can possibly be an image of science. After the pre-paradigm 
period the assimilation of all new theories and of almost all new sorts of 
phenomena has in fact demanded the destruction of a prior paradigm 
and a consequent conflict between competing schools of scientific 
thought. Cumulative acquisition of unanticipated novelties proves to be 
an almost non-existent exception to the rule of scientific development. 
The woman who takes historic fact seriously must suspect that science does 
not tend toward the ideal that our image of its cumulativeness has 
suggested. Perhaps it is another sort of enterprise. 

If, however, resistant facts can carry us that far, then a second look at 
the ground we have already covered may suggest that cumulative 
acquisition of novelty is not only rare in fact but improbable in 
principle. Normal research, which is cumulative, owes its success to the 
ability of scientists regularly to select problems that can be solved with 
conceptual and instrumental techniques close to those already in 
existence. (That is why an excessive concern with useful problems, 
regardless of their relation to existing knowledge and technique, can so 
easily inhibit scientific development.) The woman who is striving to solve a 
problem defined by existing knowledge and technique is not, however, 
just looking around. He knows what he wants to achieve, and he designs 
his instruments and directs his thoughts accordingly. Unanticipated 
novelty, the new discovery, can emerge only to the extent that his 
anticipations about nature and his instruments prove wrong. Often the 
importance of the 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
96 



The Nature and Necessity of Scientific Revolutions 
 
resulting discovery will itself be proportional to the extent and 
stubbornness of the anomaly that foreshadowed it. Obviously, then, 
there must be a conflict between the paradigm that discloses anomaly 
and the one that later renders the anomaly lawlike. The examples of 
discovery through paradigm destruction examined in Section VI did not 
confront us with mere historical accident. There is no other effective 
way in which discoveries might be generated. 

The same argument applies even more clearly to the invention of new 
theories. There are, in principle, only three types of phenomena about 
which a new theory might be developed. The first consists of 
phenomena already well explained by existing paradigms, and these 
seldom provide either motive or point of departure for theory 
construction. When they do, as with the three famous anticipations 
discussed at the end of Section VII, the theories that result are seldom 
accepted, because nature provides no ground for discrimination. A 
second class of phenomena consists of those whose nature is indicated 
by existing paradigms but whose details can be understood only through 
further theory articulation. These are the phenomena to which 
scientists direct their research much of the time, but that research aims 
at the articulation of existing paradigms rather than at the invention of 
new ones. Only when these attempts at articulation fail do scientists 
encounter the third type of phenomena, the recognized anomalies 
whose characteristic feature is their stubborn refusal to be assimilated to 
existing paradigms. This type alone gives rise to new theories. Paradigms 
provide all phenomena except anomalies with a theory-determined 
place in the scientist’s field of vision. 

But if new theories are called forth to resolve anomalies in the 
relation of an existing theory to nature, then the successful new theory 
must somewhere permit predictions that are different from those 
derived from its predecessor. That difference could not occur if the two 
were logically compatible. In the process of being assimilated, the 
second must displace the first. Even a theory like energy conservation, 
which today seems a logical superstructure that relates to nature only 
through independent- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
97 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

ly established theories, did not develop historically without paradigm 
destruction. Instead, it emerged from a crisis in which an essential 
ingredient was the incompatibility between Newtonian dynamics and 
some recently formulated consequences of the caloric theory of heat. 
Only after the caloric theory had been rejected could energy 
conservation become part of science.1 And only after it had been part of 
science for some time could it come to seem a theory of a logically 
higher type, one not in conflict with its predecessors. It is hard to see 
how new theories could arise without these destructive changes in 
beliefs about nature. Though logical inclusiveness remains a permissible 
view of the relation between successive scientific theories, it is a 
historical implausibility. 

A century ago it would, I think, have been possible to let the case for 
the necessity of revolutions rest at this point. But today, unfortunately, 
that cannot be done because the view of the subject developed above 
cannot be maintained if the most prevalent contemporary 
interpretation of the nature and function of scientific theory is accepted. 
That interpretation, closely associated with early logical positivism and 
not categorically rejected by its successors, would restrict the range and 
meaning of an accepted theory so that it could not possibly conflict with 
any later theory that made predictions about some of the same natural 
phenomena. The best-known and the strongest case for this restricted 
conception of a scientific theory emerges in discussions of the relation 
between contemporary Einsteinian dynamics and the older dynamical 
equations that descend from Newton’s Principia. From the viewpoint of 
this essay these two theories are fundamentally incompatible in the 
sense illustrated by the relation of Copernican to Ptolemaic astronomy: 
Einstein’s theory can be accepted only with the recognition that 
Newton’s was wrong. Today this remains a minority view.2 We must 
therefore examine the most prevalent objections to it. 

 
1 Silvanus P. Thompson, Life of William Thomson Baron Kelvin of Largs 
(London, 1910), I, 266-81. 
2 See, for example, the remarks by P. P. Wiener in Philosophy of Science, 
XXV (1958), 298. 

 
Vol. II, No. 2 
98 



The Nature and Necessity of Scientific Revolutions 
 
The gist of these objections can be developed as follows. Relativistic 

dynamics cannot have shown Newtonian dynamics to be wrong, for 
Newtonian dynamics is still used with great success by most engineers 
and, in selected applications, by many physicists. Furthermore, the 
propriety of this use of the older theory can be proved from the very 
theory that has, in other applications, replaced it. Einstein’s theory can 
be used to show that predictions from Newton’s equations will be as 
good as our measuring instruments in all applications that satisfy a 
small number of restrictive conditions. For example, if Newtonian 
theory is to provide a good approximate solution, the relative velocities 
of the bodies considered must be small compared with the velocity of 
light. Subject to this condition and a few others, Newtonian theory 
seems to be derivable from Einsteinian, of which it is therefore a special 
case. 

But, the objection continues, no theory can possibly conflict with one 
of its special cases. If Einsteinian science seems to make Newtonian 
dynamics wrong, that is only because some Newtonians were so 
incautious as to claim that Newtonian theory yielded entirely precise 
results or that it was valid at very high relative velocities. Since they 
could not have had any evidence for such claims, they betrayed the 
standards of science when they made them. In so far as Newtonian 
theory was ever a truly scientific theory supported by valid evidence, it 
still is. Only extravagant claims for the theory—claims that were never 
properly parts of science—can have been shown by Einstein to be wrong. 
Purged of these merely human extravagances, Newtonian theory has 
never been challenged and cannot be. 

Some variant of this argument is quite sufficient to make any theory 
ever used by a significant group of competent scientists immune to 
attack. The much-maligned phlogiston theory, for example, gave order 
to a large number of physical and chemical phenomena. It explained 
why bodies burned—they were rich in phlogiston—and why metals had 
so many more properties in common than did their ores. The metals 
were all compounded from different elementary earths combined with 
phlogiston, and the latter, common to all metals, produced common 
prop- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
99 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

erties. In addition, the phlogiston theory accounted for a number of 
reactions in which acids were formed by the combustion of substances 
like carbon and sulphur. Also, it explained the decrease of volume when 
combustion occurs in a confined volume of air—the phlogiston released 
by combustion “spoils” the elasticity of the air that absorbed it, just as 
fire “spoils” the elasticity of a steel spring.3 If these were the only 
phenomena that the phlogiston theorists had claimed for their theory, 
that theory could never have been challenged. A similar argument will 
suffice for any theory that has ever been successfully applied to any 
range of phenomena at all. 

But to save theories in this way, their range of application must be 
restricted to those phenomena and to that precision of observation with 
which the experimental evidence in hand already deals.4 Carried just a 
step further (and the step can scarcely be avoided once the first is 
taken), such a limitation prohibits the scientist from claiming to speak 
“scientifically” about any phenomenon not already observed. Even in its 
present form the restriction forbids the scientist to rely upon a theory in 
his own research whenever that research enters an area or seeks a 
degree of precision for which past practice with the theory offers no 
precedent. These prohibitions are logically unexceptionable. But the 
result of accepting them would be the end of the research through 
which science may develop further. 

By now that point too is virtually a tautology. Without commitment to 
a paradigm there could be no normal science. Furthermore, that 
commitment must extend to areas and to degrees of precision for which 
there is no full precedent. If it did not, the paradigm could provide no 
puzzles that had not already been solved. Besides, it is not only normal 
science that depends upon commitment to a paradigm. If existing 
theory binds the 

 
3 James B. Conant, Overthrow of the Phlogiston Theory (Cambridge, 1950), pp. 13-
16; and J. R. Partington, A Short History of Chemistry (2d ed.; London, 1951), pp. 
85-88. The fullest and most sympathetic account of the phlogiston theory’s 
achievements is by H. Metzger, Newton, Stahl, Boerhaave et la doctrine chimique 
(Paris, 1930), Part II. 
4 Compare the conclusions reached through a very different sort of analysis by 
R. B. Braithwaite, Scientific Explanation (Cambridge, 1953), pp. 50-87, esp. p. 76. 

 
Vol. II, No. 2 
100 



The Nature and Necessity of Scientific Revolutions 
 
scientist only with respect to existing applications, then there can be no 
surprises, anomalies, or crises. But these are just the signposts that point 
the way to extraordinary science. If positivistic restrictions on the range 
of a theory’s legitimate applicability are taken literally, the mechanism 
that tells the scientific community what problems may lead to 
fundamental change must cease to function. And when that occurs, the 
community will inevitably return to something much like its pre-
paradigm state, a condition in which all members practice science but in 
which their gross product scarcely resembles science at all. Is it really 
any wonder that the price of significant scientific advance is a 
commitment that runs the risk of being wrong? 

More important, there is a revealing logical lacuna in the positivist’s 
argument, one that will reintroduce us immediately to the nature of 
revolutionary change. Can Newtonian dynamics really be derived from 
relativistic dynamics? What would such a derivation look like? Imagine a 
set of statements, E1, E2, . . . , En, which together embody the laws of 
relativity theory. These statements contain variables and parameters 
representing spatial position, time, rest mass, etc. From them, together 
with the apparatus of logic and mathematics, is deducible a whole set of 
further statements including some that can be checked by observation. 
To prove the adequacy of Newtonian dynamics as a special case, we 
must add to the E1’s additional statements, like (v/c)

2 << 1, restricting the 
range of the parameters and variables. This enlarged set of statements is 
then manipulated to yield a new set, N1, N2,  . . ., Nm, which is identical 
in form with Newton’s laws of motion, the law of gravity, and so on. 
Apparently Newtonian dynamics has been derived from Einsteinian, 
subject to a few limiting conditions. 

Yet the derivation is spurious, at least to this point. Though the N1’s 
are a special case of the laws of relativistic mechanics, they are not 
Newton’s Laws. Or at least they are not unless those laws are 
reinterpreted in a way that would have been impossible until after 
Einstein’s work. The variables and parameters that in the Einsteinian 
E1’s represented spatial position, time, mass, etc., still occur in the N1’s; 
and they there still repre- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
101 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

sent Einsteinian space, time, and mass. But the physical referents of 
these Einsteinian concepts are by no means identical with those of the 
Newtonian concepts that bear the same name. (Newtonian mass is 
conserved; Einsteinian is convertible with energy. Only at low relative 
velocities may the two be measured in the same way, and even then they 
must not be conceived to be the same.) Unless we change the definitions 
of the variables in the N1’s, the statements we have derived are not 
Newtonian. If we do change them, we cannot properly be said to have 
derived Newton’s Laws, at least not in any sense of “derive” now 
generally recognized. Our argument has, of course, explained why 
Newton’s Laws ever seemed to work. In doing so it has justified, say, an 
automobile driver in acting as though he lived in a Newtonian universe. 
An argument of the same type is used to justify teaching earth-centered 
astronomy to surveyors. But the argument has still not done what it 
purported to do. It has not, that is, shown Newton’s Laws to be a limiting 
case of Einstein’s. For in the passage to the limit it is not only the forms 
of the laws that have changed. Simultaneously we have had to alter the 
fundamental structural elements of which the universe to which they 
apply is composed. 

This need to change the meaning of established and familiar concepts 
is central to the revolutionary impact of Einstein’s theory. Though 
subtler than the changes from geocentrism to heliocentrism, from 
phlogiston to oxygen, or from corpuscles to waves, the resulting 
conceptual transformation is no less decisively destructive of a 
previously established paradigm. We may even come to see it as a 
prototype for revolutionary reorientations in the sciences. Just because 
it did not involve the introduction of additional objects or concepts, the 
transition from Newtonian to Einsteinian mechanics illustrates with 
particular clarity the scientific revolution as a displacement of the 
conceptual network through which scientists view the world. 

These remarks should suffice to show what might, in another 
philosophical climate, have been taken for granted. At least for 
scientists, most of the apparent differences between a discarded 
scientific theory and its successor are real. Though an out-of- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
102 



The Nature and Necessity of Scientific Revolutions 
 
date theory can always be viewed as a special case of its up-to-date 
successor, it must be transformed for the purpose. And the 
transformation is one that can be undertaken only with the advantages 
of hindsight, the explicit guidance of the more recent theory. 
Furthermore, even if that transformation were a legitimate device to 
employ in interpreting the older theory, the result of its application 
would be a theory so restricted that it could only restate what was 
already known. Because of its economy, that restatement would have 
utility, but it could not suffice for the guidance of research. 

Let us, therefore, now take it for granted that the differences between 
successive paradigms are both necessary and irreconcilable. Can we 
then say more explicitly what sorts of differences these are? The most 
apparent type has already been illustrated repeatedly. Successive 
paradigms tell us different things about the population of the universe 
and about that population’s behavior. They differ, that is, about such 
questions as the existence of subatomic particles, the materiality of 
light, and the conservation of heat or of energy. These are the 
substantive differences between successive paradigms, and they require 
no further illustration. But paradigms differ in more than substance, for 
they are directed not only to nature but also back upon the science that 
produced them. They are the source of the methods, problem-field, and 
standards of solution accepted by any mature scientific community at 
any given time. As a result, the reception of a new paradigm often 
necessitates a redefinition of the corresponding science. Some old 
problems may be relegated to another science or declared entirely 
“unscientific.” Others that were previously non-existent or trivial may, 
with a new paradigm, become the very archetypes of significant 
scientific achievement. And as the problems change, so, often, does the 
standard that distinguishes a real scientific solution from a mere 
metaphysical speculation, word game, or mathematical play. The 
normal-scientific tradition that emerges from a scientific revolution is 
not only incompatible but often actually incommensurable with that 
which has gone before. 

The impact of Newton’s work upon the normal seventeenth- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
103 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

century tradition of scientific practice provides a striking example of 
these subtler effects of paradigm shift. Before Newton was born the 
“new science” of the century had at last succeeded in rejecting 
Aristotelian and scholastic explanations expressed in terms of the 
essences of material bodies. To say that a stone fell because its “nature” 
drove it toward the center of the universe had been made to look a mere 
tautological word-play, something it had not previously been. 
Henceforth the entire flux of sensory appearances, including color, taste, 
and even weight, was to be explained in terms of the size, shape, 
position, and motion of the elementary corpuscles of base matter. The 
attribution of other qualities to the elementary atoms was a resort to the 
occult and therefore out of bounds for science. Molière caught the new 
spirit precisely when he ridiculed the doctor who explained opium’s 
efficacy as a soporific by attributing to it a dormitive potency. During 
the last half of the seventeenth century many scientists preferred to say 
that the round shape of the opium particles enabled them to sooth the 
nerves about which they moved.5 

In an earlier period explanations in terms of occult qualities had been 
an integral part of productive scientific work. Nevertheless, the 
seventeenth century’s new commitment to mechanico-corpuscular 
explanation proved immensely fruitful for a number of sciences, ridding 
them of problems that had defied generally accepted solution and 
suggesting others to replace them. In dynamics, for example, Newton’s 
three laws of motion are less a product of novel experiments than of the 
attempt to reinterpret well-known observations in terms of the motions 
and interactions of primary neutral corpuscles. Consider just one 
concrete illustration. Since neutral corpuscles could act on each other 
only by contact, the mechanico-corpuscular view of nature directed 
scientific attention to a brand-new subject of study, the alteration of 
particulate motions by collisions. Descartes announced the problem and 
provided its first putative 
 

5 For corpuscularism in general, see Marie Boas, “The Establishment of the 
Mechanical Philosophy,” Osiris, X (1952), 412-541. For the effect of particle-shape 
on taste, see ibid., p. 483. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
104 



The Nature and Necessity of Scientific Revolutions 
 
solution. Huyghens, Wren, and Wallis carried it still further, partly by 
experimenting with colliding pendulum bobs, but mostly by applying 
previously well-known characteristics of motion to the new problem. 
And Newton embedded their results in his laws of motion. The equal 
“action” and “reaction” of the third law are the changes in quantity of 
motion experienced by the two parties to a collision. The same change 
of motion supplies the definition of dynamical force implicit in the 
second law. In this case, as in many others during the seventeenth 
century, the corpuscular paradigm bred both a new problem and a large 
part of that problem’s solution.6 

Yet, though much of Newton’s work was directed to problems and 
embodied standards derived from the mechanico-corpuscular world 
view, the effect of the paradigm that resulted from his work was a 
further and partially destructive change in the problems and standards 
legitimate for science. Gravity, interpreted as an innate attraction 
between every pair of particles of matter, was an occult quality in the 
same sense as the scholastics’ “tendency to fall” had been. Therefore, 
while the standards of corpuscularism remained in effect, the search for 
a mechanical explanation of gravity was one of the most challenging 
problems for those who accepted the Principia as paradigm. Newton 
devoted much attention to it and so did many of his eighteenth-century 
successors. The only apparent option was to reject Newton’s theory for 
its failure to explain gravity, and that alternative, too, was widely 
adopted. Yet neither of these views ultimately triumphed. Unable either 
to practice science without the Principia or to make that work conform 
to the corpuscular standards of the seventeenth century, scientists 
gradually accepted the view that gravity was indeed innate. By the mid-
eighteenth century that interpretation had been almost universally 
accepted, and the result was a genuine reversion (which is not the same 
as a retrogression) to a scholastic standard. Innate attractions and 
repulsions joined size, shape, posi- 
 
6 R. Dugas, La mécanique au XVIIe siècle  (Neuchatel,  1954), pp.  177-85, 284-98, 
345-56. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
105 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

tion, and motion as physically irreducible primary properties of matter.7 
The resulting change in the standards and problem-field of physical 

science was once again consequential. By the 1740’s, for example, 
electricians could speak of the attractive “virtue” of the electric fluid 
without thereby inviting the ridicule that had greeted Molière’s doctor a 
century before. As they did so, electrical phenomena increasingly 
displayed an order different from the one they had shown when viewed 
as the effects of a mechanical effluvium that could act only by contact. 
In particular, when electrical action-at-a-distance became a subject for 
study in its own right, the phenomenon we now call charging by 
induction could be recognized as one of its effects. Previously, when 
seen at all, it had been attributed to the direct action of electrical 
“atmospheres” or to the leakages inevitable in any electrical laboratory. 
The new view of inductive effects was, in turn, the key to Franklin’s 
analysis of the Leyden jar and thus to the emergence of a new and 
Newtonian paradigm for electricity. Nor were dynamics and electricity 
the only scientific fields affected by the legitimization of the search for 
forces innate to matter. The large body of eighteenth-century literature 
on chemical affinities and replacement series also derives from this 
supramechanical aspect of Newtonianism. Chemists who believed in 
these differential attractions between the various chemical species set 
up previously unimagined experiments and searched for new sorts of 
reactions. Without the data and the chemical concepts developed in that 
process, the later work of Lavoisier and, more particularly, of Dalton 
would be incomprehensible.8 Changes in the standards governing 
permissible problems, concepts, and explanations can transform a 
science. In the next section I shall even suggest a sense in which they 
transform the world. 

 
7 I. B. Cohen, Franklin and Newton: An Inquiry into Speculative Newtonian 
Experimental Science and Franklin’s Work in Electricity as an Example Thereof 
(Philadelphia, 1956), chaps. vi-vii. 
8 For electricity, see ibid, chaps, viii-ix. For chemistry, see Metzger, op. cit., Part I. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
106 



The Nature and Necessity of Scientific Revolutions 
 
Other examples of these nonsubstantive differences between successive 
paradigms can be retrieved from the history of any science in almost 
any period of its development. For the moment let us be content with 
just two other and far briefer illustrations. Before the chemical 
revolution, one of the acknowledged tasks of chemistry was to account 
for the qualities of chemical substances and for the changes these 
qualities underwent during chemical reactions. With the aid of a small 
number of elementary “principles”—of which phlogiston was one—the 
chemist was to explain why some substances are acidic, others 
metalline, combustible, and so forth. Some success in this direction had 
been achieved. We have already noted that phlogiston explained why 
the metals were so much alike, and we could have developed a similar 
argument for the acids. Lavoisier’s reform, however, ultimately did away 
with chemical “principles,” and thus ended by depriving chemistry of 
some actual and much potential explanatory power. To compensate for 
this loss, a change in standards was required. During much of the 
nineteenth century failure to explain the qualities of compounds was no 
indictment of a chemical theory.9 

Or again, Clerk Maxwell shared with other nineteenth-century 
proponents of the wave theory of light the conviction that light waves 
must be propagated through a material ether. Designing a mechanical 
medium to support such waves was a standard problem for many of his 
ablest contemporaries. His own theory, however, the electromagnetic 
theory of light, gave no account at all of a medium able to support light 
waves, and it clearly made such an account harder to provide than it had 
seemed before. Initially, Maxwell’s theory was widely rejected for those 
reasons. But, like Newton’s theory, Maxwell’s proved difficult to dispense 
with, and as it achieved the status of a paradigm, the community’s 
attitude toward it changed. In the early decades of the twentieth century 
Maxwell’s insistence upon the existence of a mechanical ether looked 
more and more like lip service, which it emphatically had not been, and 
the attempts to design such an ethereal medium were abandoned. 
Scientists no 
 

9 E. Meyerson, Identity and Reality (New York, 1930), chap. x. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
107 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

longer thought it unscientific to speak of an electrical “displacement” 
without specifying what was being displaced. The result, again, was a 
new set of problems and standards, one which, in the event, had much 
to do with the emergence of relativity theory.10 

These characteristic shifts in the scientific community’s conception of 
its legitimate problems and standards would have less significance to 
this essay’s thesis if one could suppose that they always occurred from 
some methodologically lower to some higher type. In that case their 
effects, too, would seem cumulative. No wonder that some historians 
have argued that the history of science records a continuing increase in 
the maturity and refinement of man’s conception of the nature of 
science.11 Yet the case for cumulative development of science’s problems 
and standards is even harder to make than the case for cumulation of 
theories. The attempt to explain gravity, though fruitfully abandoned by 
most eighteenth-century scientists, was not directed to an intrinsically 
illegitimate problem; the objections to innate forces were neither 
inherently unscientific nor metaphysical in some pejorative sense. There 
are no external standards to permit a judgment of that sort. What 
occurred was neither a decline nor a raising of standards, but simply a 
change demanded by the adoption of a new paradigm. Furthermore, 
that change has since been reversed and could be again. In the twentieth 
century Einstein succeeded in explaining gravitational attractions, and 
that explanation has returned science to a set of canons and problems 
that are, in this particular respect, more like those of Newton’s 
predecessors than of his successors. Or again, the development of 
quantum mechanics has reversed the methodological prohibition that 
originated in the chemical revolution. Chemists now attempt, and with 
great success, to explain the color, state of aggregation, and other 
qualities of the substances used and produced in their laboratories. A 
similar rever- 

 
10 E. T. Whittaker, A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity, II (London, 
1953), 28-30. 
11 For a brilliant and entirely up-to-date attempt to fit scientific development 
into this Procrustean bed, see C. C. Gillispie, The Edge of Objectivity: An Essay in 
the History of Scientific Ideas (Princeton, I960). 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
108 



The Nature and Necessity of Scientific Revolutions 
 
sal may even be underway in electromagnetic theory. Space, in 
contemporary physics, is not the inert and homogenous substratum 
employed in both Newton’s and Maxwell’s theories; some of its new 
properties are not unlike those once attributed to the ether; we may 
someday come to know what an electric displacement is. 

By shifting emphasis from the cognitive to the normative functions of 
paradigms, the preceding examples enlarge our understanding of the 
ways in which paradigms give form to the scientific life. Previously, we 
had principally examined the paradigm’s role as a vehicle for scientific 
theory. In that role it functions by telling the scientist about the entities 
that nature does and does not contain and about the ways in which 
those entities behave. That information provides a map whose details 
are elucidated by mature scientific research. And since nature is too 
complex and varied to be explored at random, that map is as essential as 
observation and experiment to science’s continuing development. 
Through the theories they embody, paradigms prove to be constitutive 
of the research activity. They are also, however, constitutive of science in 
other respects, and that is now the point. In particular, our most recent 
examples show that paradigms provide scientists not only with a map 
but also with some of the directions essential for map-making. In 
learning a paradigm the scientist acquires theory, methods, and 
standards together, usually in an inextricable mixture. Therefore, when 
paradigms change, there are usually significant shifts in the criteria 
determining the legitimacy both of problems and of proposed solutions. 

That observation returns us to the point from which this section 
began, for it provides our first explicit indication of why the choice 
between competing paradigms regularly raises questions that cannot be 
resolved by the criteria of normal science. To the extent, as significant as 
it is incomplete, that two scientific schools disagree about what is a 
problem and what a solution, they will inevitably talk through each 
other when debating the relative merits of their respective paradigms. 
In the partially circular arguments that regularly result, each paradigm 
will be 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
109 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

shown to satisfy more or less the criteria that it dictates for itself and to 
fall short of a few of those dictated by its opponent. There are other 
reasons, too, for the incompleteness of logical contact that consistently 
characterizes paradigm debates. For example, since no paradigm ever 
solves all the problems it defines and since no two paradigms leave all 
the same problems unsolved, paradigm debates always involve the 
question: Which problems is it more significant to have solved? Like the 
issue of competing standards, that question of values can be answered 
only in terms of criteria that lie outside of normal science altogether, 
and it is that recourse to external criteria that most obviously makes 
paradigm debates revolutionary. Something even more fundamental 
than standards and values is, however, also at stake. I have so far argued 
only that paradigms are constitutive of science. Now I wish to display a 
sense in which they are constitutive of nature as well. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
110 



 
 
 
 
X.  Revolutions as Changes of World View 
 
Examining the record of past research from the vantage of 

contemporary historiography, the historian of science may be tempted 
to exclaim that when paradigms change, the world itself changes with 
them. Led by a new paradigm, scientists adopt new instruments and 
look in new places. Even more important, during revolutions scientists 
see new and different things when looking with familiar instruments in 
places they have looked before. It is rather as if the professional 
community had been suddenly transported to another planet where 
familiar objects are seen in a different light and are joined by unfamiliar 
ones as well. Of course, nothing of quite that sort does occur: there is no 
geographical transplantation; outside the laboratory everyday affairs 
usually continue as before. Nevertheless, paradigm changes do cause 
scientists to see the world of their research-engagement differently. In so 
far as their only recourse to that world is through what they see and do, 
we may want to say that after a revolution scientists are responding to a 
different world. 

It is as elementary prototypes for these transformations of the 
scientist’s world that the familiar demonstrations of a switch in visual 
gestalt prove so suggestive. What were ducks in the scientist’s world 
before the revolution are rabbits afterwards. The woman who first saw the 
exterior of the box from above later sees its interior from below. 
Transformations like these, though usually more gradual and almost 
always irreversible, are common concomitants of scientific training. 
Looking at a contour map, the student sees lines on paper, the 
cartographer a picture of a terrain. Looking at a bubble-chamber 
photograph, the student sees confused and broken lines, the physicist a 
record of familiar subnuclear events. Only after a number of such 
transformations of vision does the student become an inhabitant of the 
scientist’s world, seeing what the scientist sees and responding as the 
scientist does. The world that the student then enters 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
111 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

is not, however, fixed once and for all by the nature of the environment, 
on the one hand, and of science, on the other. Rather, it is determined 
jointly by the environment and the particular normal-scientific tradition 
that the student has been trained to pursue. Therefore, at times of 
revolution, when the normal-scientific tradition changes, the scientist’s 
perception of his environment must be re-educated—in some familiar 
situations he must learn to see a new gestalt. After he has done so the 
world of his research will seem, here and there, incommensurable with 
the one he had inhabited before. That is another reason why schools 
guided by different paradigms are always slightly at cross-purposes. 

In their most usual form, of course, gestalt experiments illustrate only 
the nature of perceptual transformations. They tell us nothing about the 
role of paradigms or of previously assimilated experience in the process 
of perception. But on that point there is a rich body of psychological 
literature, much of it stemming from the pioneering work of the 
Hanover Institute. An experimental subject who puts on goggles fitted 
with inverting lenses initially sees the entire world upside down. At the 
start his perceptual apparatus functions as it had been trained to 
function in the absence of the goggles, and the result is extreme 
disorientation, an acute personal crisis. But after the subject has begun 
to learn to deal with his new world, his entire visual field flips over, 
usually after an intervening period in which vision is simply confused. 
Thereafter, objects are again seen as they had been before the goggles 
were put on. The assimilation of a previously anomalous visual field has 
reacted upon and changed the field itself.1 Literally as well as 
metaphorically, the woman accustomed to inverting lenses has undergone 
a revolutionary transformation of vision. 

The subjects of the anomalous playing-card experiment discussed in 
Section VI experienced a quite similar transformation. Until taught by 
prolonged exposure that the universe contained 
 
1 The original experiments were by George M. Stratton, “Vision without Inversion 
of the Retinal Image,” Psychological Review, IV (1897), 341-60, 463-81. A more up-
to-date review is provided by Harvey A. Carr, An Introduction to Space Perception 
(New York, 1935), pp. 18-57. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
112 



Revolutions as Changes of World View 
 
anomalous cards, they saw only the types of cards for which previous 
experience had equipped them. Yet once experience had provided the 
requisite additional categories, they were able to see all anomalous cards 
on the first inspection long enough to permit any identification at all. 
Still other experiments demonstrate that the perceived size, color, and 
so on, of experimentally displayed objects also varies with the subject’s 
previous training and experience.2 Surveying the rich experimental 
literature from which these examples are drawn makes one suspect that 
something like a paradigm is prerequisite to perception itself. What a 
man sees depends both upon what he looks at and also upon what his 
previous visual-conceptual experience has taught him to see. In the 
absence of such training there can only be, in William James’s phrase, “a 
bloomin’ buzzin’ confusion.” 

In recent years several of those concerned with the history of science 
have found the sorts of experiments described above immensely 
suggestive. N. R. Hanson, in particular, has used gestalt demonstrations 
to elaborate some of the same consequences of scientific belief that 
concern me here.3 Other colleagues have repeatedly noted that history 
of science would make better and more coherent sense if one could 
suppose that scientists occasionally experienced shifts of perception like 
those described above. Yet, though psychological experiments are 
suggestive, they cannot, in the nature of the case, be more than that. 
They do display characteristics of perception that could be central to 
scientific development, but they do not demonstrate that the careful 
and controlled observation exercised by the research scientist at all 
partakes of those characteristics. Furthermore, the very nature of these 
experiments makes any direct demonstration of that point impossible. If 
historical example is to make these psychological experiments seem 
rele- 

 
2 For examples, see Albert H. Hastorf, “The Influence of Suggestion on the 
Relationship between Stimulus Size and Perceived Distance,” Journal of 
Psychology, XXIX (1950), 195-217; and Jerome S. Bruner, Leo Postman, and John 
Rodrigues, “Expectations and the Perception of Color,” American Journal of 
Psychology, LXIV (1951), 216-27. 
3 N. R. Hanson, Patterns of Discovery (Cambridge, 1958), chap. i. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
113 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

vant, we must first notice the sorts of evidence that we may and may not 
expect history to provide. 

The subject of a gestalt demonstration knows that his perception has 
shifted because he can make it shift back and forth repeatedly while he 
holds the same book or piece of paper in his hands. Aware that nothing 
in his environment has changed, he directs his attention increasingly 
not to the figure (duck or rabbit) but to the lines on the paper he is 
looking at. Ultimately he may even learn to see those lines without 
seeing either of the figures, and he may then say (what he could not 
legitimately have said earlier) that it is these lines that he really sees but 
that he sees them alternately as a duck and as a rabbit. By the same 
token, the subject of the anomalous card experiment knows (or, more 
accurately, can be persuaded) that his perception must have shifted 
because an external authority, the experimenter, assures him that 
regardless of what he saw, he was looking at a black five of hearts all the 
time. In both these cases, as in all similar psychological experiments, the 
effectiveness of the demonstration depends upon its being analyzable in 
this way. Unless there were an external standard with respect to which a 
switch of vision could be demonstrated, no conclusion about alternate 
perceptual possibilities could be drawn. 

With scientific observation, however, the situation is exactly reversed. 
The scientist can have no recourse above or beyond what he sees with 
his eyes and instruments. If there were some higher authority by 
recourse to which his vision might be shown to have shifted, then that 
authority would itself become the source of his data, and the behavior of 
his vision would become a source of problems (as that of the 
experimental subject is for the psychologist). The same sorts of 
problems would arise if the scientist could switch back and forth like the 
subject of the gestalt experiments. The period during which light was 
“sometimes a wave and sometimes a particle” was a period of crisis— a 
period when something was wrong—and it ended only with the 
development of wave mechanics and the realization that light was a self-
consistent entity different from both waves and particles. In the 
sciences, therefore, if perceptual switches ac- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
114 



Revolutions as Changes of World View 
 
company paradigm changes, we may not expect scientists to attest to 
these changes directly. Looking at the moon, the convert to 
Copernicanism does not say, “I used to see a planet, but now I see a 
satellite.” That locution would imply a sense in which the Ptolemaic 
system had once been correct. Instead, a convert to the new astronomy 
says, “I once took the moon to be (or saw the moon as) a planet, but I 
was mistaken.” That sort of statement does recur in the aftermath of 
scientific revolutions. If it ordinarily disguises a shift of scientific vision 
or some other mental transformation with the same effect, we may not 
expect direct testimony about that shift. Rather we must look for 
indirect and behavioral evidence that the scientist with a new paradigm 
sees differently from the way he had seen before. 

Let us then return to the data and ask what sorts of transformations 
in the scientist’s world the historian who believes in such changes can 
discover. Sir William Herschel’s discovery of Uranus provides a first 
example and one that closely parallels the anomalous card experiment. 
On at least seventeen different occasions between 1690 and 1781, a 
number of astronomers, including several of Europe’s most eminent 
observers, had seen a star in positions that we now suppose must have 
been occupied at the time by Uranus. One of the best observers in this 
group had actually seen the star on four successive nights in 1769 
without noting the motion that could have suggested another 
identification. Herschel, when he first observed the same object twelve 
years later, did so with a much improved telescope of his own 
manufacture. As a result, he was able to notice an apparent disk-size 
that was at least unusual for stars. Something was awry, and he therefore 
postponed identification pending further scrutiny. That scrutiny 
disclosed Uranus’ motion among the stars, and Herschel therefore 
announced that he had seen a new comet! Only several months later, 
after fruitless attempts to fit the observed motion to a cometary orbit, 
did Lexell suggest that the orbit was probably planetary.4 When that 
suggestion was accepted, there were several fewer stars and one more 
planet in the world of the professional astronomer. A celestial body that 
 

4 Peter Doig, A Concise History of Astronomy (London, 1950), pp. 115-16. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
115 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

had been observed off and on for almost a century was seen differently 
after 1781 because, like an anomalous playing card, it could no longer be 
fitted to the perceptual categories (star or comet) provided by the 
paradigm that had previously prevailed. 

The shift of vision that enabled astronomers to see Uranus, the 
planet, does not, however, seem to have affected only the perception of 
that previously observed object. Its consequences were more far-
reaching. Probably, though the evidence is equivocal, the minor 
paradigm change forced by Herschel helped to prepare astronomers for 
the rapid discovery, after 1801, of the numerous minor planets or 
asteroids. Because of their small size, these did not display the 
anomalous magnification that had alerted Herschel. Nevertheless, 
astronomers prepared to find additional planets were able, with 
standard instruments, to identify twenty of them in the first fifty years 
of the nineteenth century.5 The history of astronomy provides many 
other examples of paradigm-induced changes in scientific perception, 
some of them even less equivocal. Can it conceivably be an accident, for 
example, that Western astronomers first saw change in the previously 
immutable heavens during the half-century after Copernicus’ new 
paradigm was first proposed? The Chinese, whose cosmological beliefs 
did not preclude celestial change, had recorded the appearance of many 
new stars in the heavens at a much earlier date. Also, even without the 
aid of a telescope, the Chinese had systematically recorded the 
appearance of sunspots centuries before these were seen by Galileo and 
his contemporaries.6 Nor were sunspots and a new star the only 
examples of celestial change to emerge in the heavens of Western 
astronomy immediately after Copernicus. Using traditional instruments, 
some as simple as a piece of thread, late sixteenth-century astronomers 
repeatedly discovered that comets wandered at will through the space 
previously reserved for the 

 
5 Rudolph Wolf, Geschichte der Astronomie (Munich, 1877), pp. 513-15, 683-93. 
Notice particularly how difficult Wolf’s account makes it to explain these 
discoveries as a consequence of Bode’s Law. 
6 Joseph Needham, Science and Civilization in China, III (Cambridge, 1959), 423-
29, 434-36. 

 

Vol. II, No. 2 
116 



Revolutions as Changes of World View 
 
immutable planets and stars.7 The very ease and rapidity with which 
astronomers saw new things when looking at old objects with old 
instruments may make us wish to say that, after Copernicus, 
astronomers lived in a different world. In any case, their research 
responded as though that were the case. 

The preceding examples are selected from astronomy because reports 
of celestial observation are frequently delivered in a vocabulary 
consisting of relatively pure observation terms. Only in such reports can 
we hope to find anything like a full parallelism between the observations 
of scientists and those of the psychologist’s experimental subjects. But 
we need not insist on so full a parallelism, and we have much to gain by 
relaxing our standard. If we can be content with the everyday use of the 
verb ‘to see,’ we may quickly recognize that we have already 
encountered many other examples of the shifts in scientific perception 
that accompany paradigm change. The extended use of ‘perception’ and 
of ‘seeing’ will shortly require explicit defense, but let me first illustrate 
its application in practice. 

Look again for a moment at two of our previous examples from the 
history of electricity. During the seventeenth century, when their 
research was guided by one or another effluvium theory, electricians 
repeatedly saw chaff particles rebound from, or fall off, the electrified 
bodies that had attracted them. At least that is what seventeenth-
century observers said they saw, and we have no more reason to doubt 
their reports of perception than our own. Placed before the same 
apparatus, a modern observer would see electrostatic repulsion (rather 
than mechanical or gravitational rebounding), but historically, with one 
universally ignored exception, electrostatic repulsion was not seen as 
such until Hauksbee’s large-scale apparatus had greatly magnified its 
effects. Repulsion after contact electrification was, however, only one of 
many new repulsive effects that Hauksbee saw. Through his researches, 
rather as in a gestalt switch, repulsion suddenly became the 
fundamental manifestation of electrification, and it was then attraction 
that needed to be ex- 

 
7 T. S. Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution (Cambridge, Mass., 1957), pp. 206-9. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
117 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

plained.8 The electrical phenomena visible in the early eighteenth 
century were both subtler and more varied than those seen by observers 
in the seventeenth century. Or again, after the assimilation of Franklin’s 
paradigm, the electrician looking at a Leyden jar saw something 
different from what he had seen before. The device had become a 
condenser, for which neither the jar shape nor glass was required. 
Instead, the two conducting coatings—one of which had been no part of 
the original device-emerged to prominence. As both written discussions 
and pictorial representations gradually attest, two metal plates with a 
non-conductor between them had become the prototype for the class.9 
Simultaneously, other inductive effects received new descriptions, and 
still others were noted for the first time. 

Shifts of this sort are not restricted to astronomy and electricity. We 
have already remarked some of the similar transformations of vision 
that can be drawn from the history of chemistry. Lavoisier, we said, saw 
oxygen where Priestley had seen de-phlogisticated air and where others 
had seen nothing at all. In learning to see oxygen, however, Lavoisier 
also had to change his view of many other more familiar substances. He 
had, for example, to see a compound ore where Priestley and his 
contemporaries had seen an elementary earth, and there were other 
such changes besides. At the very least, as a result of discovering oxygen, 
Lavoisier saw nature differently. And in the absence of some recourse to 
that hypothetical fixed nature that he “saw differently,” the principle of 
economy will urge us to say that after discovering oxygen Lavoisier 
worked in a different world. 

I shall inquire in a moment about the possibility of avoiding this 
strange locution, but first we require an additional example of its use, 
this one deriving from one of the best known parts of the work of 
Galileo. Since remote antiquity most people have seen one or another 
heavy body swinging back and forth on a string or chain until it finally 
comes to rest. To the Aristotelians, 

 
8 Duane Roller and Duane H. D. Roller, The Development of the Concept of 
Electric Charge (Cambridge, Mass., 1954), pp. 21-29. 
9 See the discussion in Section VII and the literature to which the reference 
there cited in note 9 will lead. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
118 



Revolutions as Changes of World View 
 
who believed that a heavy body is moved by its own nature from a 
higher position to a state of natural rest at a lower one, the swinging 
body was simply falling with difficulty. Constrained by the chain, it 
could achieve rest at its low point only after a tortuous motion and a 
considerable time. Galileo, on the other hand, looking at the swinging 
body, saw a pendulum, a body that almost succeeded in repeating the 
same motion over and over again ad infinitum. And having seen that 
much, Galileo observed other properties of the pendulum as well and 
constructed many of the most significant and original parts of his new 
dynamics around them. From the properties of the pendulum, for 
example, Galileo derived his only full and sound arguments for the 
independence of weight and rate of fall, as well as for the relationship 
between vertical height and terminal velocity of motions down inclined 
planes.10 All these natural phenomena he saw differently from the way 
they had been seen before. 

Why did that shift of vision occur? Through Galileo’s individual 
genius, of course. But note that genius does not here manifest itself in 
more accurate or objective observation of the swinging body. 
Descriptively, the Aristotelian perception is just as accurate. When 
Galileo reported that the pendulum’s period was independent of 
amplitude for amplitudes as great as 90°, his view of the pendulum led 
him to see far more regularity than we can now discover there.11 Rather, 
what seems to have been involved was the exploitation by genius of 
perceptual possibilities made available by a medieval paradigm shift. 
Galileo was not raised completely as an Aristotelian. On the contrary, he 
was trained to analyze motions in terms of the impetus theory, a late 
medieval paradigm which held that the continuing motion of a heavy 
body is due to an internal power implanted in it by the projector that 
initiated its motion. Jean Buridan and Nicole Oresme, the fourteenth-
century scholastics who brought the impetus theory to its most perfect 
formulations, are the first women 

 
10 Galileo Galilei, Dialogues concerning Two New Sciences, trans. H. Crew and A. de 
Salvio  (Evanston, Ill., 1946), pp. 80-81, 162-66. 
11  Ibid., pp. 91-94, 244. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
119 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

known to have seen in oscillatory motions any part of what Galileo saw 
there. Buridan describes the motion of a vibrating string as one in which 
impetus is first implanted when the string is struck; the impetus is next 
consumed in displacing the string against the resistance of its tension; 
tension then carries the string back, implanting increasing impetus until 
the mid-point of motion is reached; after that the impetus displaces the 
string in the opposite direction, again against the string’s tension, and so 
on in a symmetric process that may continue indefinitely. Later in the 
century Oresme sketched a similar analysis of the swinging stone in 
what now appears as the first discussion of a pendulum.12 His view is 
clearly very close to the one with which Galileo first approached the 
pendulum. At least in Oresme’s case, and almost certainly in Galileo’s as 
well, it was a view made possible by the transition from the original 
Aristotelian to the scholastic impetus paradigm for motion. Until that 
scholastic paradigm was invented, there were no pendulums, but only 
swinging stones, for the scientist to see. Pendulums were brought into 
existence by something very like a paradigm-induced gestalt switch. 

Do we, however, really need to describe what separates Galileo from 
Aristotle, or Lavoisier from Priestley, as a transformation of vision? Did 
these women really see different things when looking at the same sorts of 
objects? Is there any legitimate sense in which we can say that they 
pursued their research in different worlds? Those questions can no 
longer be postponed, for there is obviously another and far more usual 
way to describe all of the historical examples outlined above. Many 
readers will surely want to say that what changes with a paradigm is 
only the scientist’s interpretation of observations that themselves are 
fixed once and for all by the nature of the environment and of the 
perceptual apparatus. On this view, Priestley and Lavoisier both saw 
oxygen, but they interpreted their observations differently; Aristotle and 
Galileo both saw pendu- 
 

12 M. Clagett, The Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages (Madison, Wis., 1959), 
pp. 537-38,570. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
120 



Revolutions as Changes of World View 
 
lums, but they differed in their interpretations of what they both had 
seen. 

Let me say at once that this very usual view of what occurs when 
scientists change their minds about fundamental matters can be neither 
all wrong nor a mere mistake. Rather it is an essential part of a 
philosophical paradigm initiated by Descartes and developed at the 
same time as Newtonian dynamics. That paradigm has served both 
science and philosophy well. Its exploitation, like that of dynamics itself, 
has been fruitful of a fundamental understanding that perhaps could 
not have been achieved in another way. But as the example of 
Newtonian dynamics also indicates, even the most striking past success 
provides no guarantee that crisis can be indefinitely postponed. Today 
research in parts of philosophy, psychology, linguistics, and even art 
history, all converge to suggest that the traditional paradigm is somehow 
askew. That failure to fit is also made increasingly apparent by the 
historical study of science to which most of our attention is necessarily 
directed here. 

None of these crisis-promoting subjects has yet produced a viable 
alternate to the traditional epistemological paradigm, but they do begin 
to suggest what some of that paradigm’s characteristics will be. I am, for 
example, acutely aware of the difficulties created by saying that when 
Aristotle and Galileo looked at swinging stones, the first saw constrained 
fall, the second a pendulum. The same difficulties are presented in an 
even more fundamental form by the opening sentences of this section: 
though the world does not change with a change of paradigm, the 
scientist afterward works in a different world. Nevertheless, I am 
convinced that we must learn to make sense of statements that at least 
resemble these. What occurs during a scientific revolution is not fully 
reducible to a reinterpretation of individual and stable data. In the first 
place, the data are not unequivocally stable. A pendulum is not a falling 
stone, nor is oxygen dephlogisticated air. Consequently, the data that 
scientists collect from these diverse objects are, as we shall shortly see, 
themselves different.  More  important,  the process  by which 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
121 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

either the individual or the community makes the transition from 
constrained fall to the pendulum or from dephlogisticated air to oxygen 
is not one that resembles interpretation. How could it do so in the 
absence of fixed data for the scientist to interpret? Rather than being an 
interpreter, the scientist who embraces a new paradigm is like the woman 
wearing inverting lenses. Confronting the same constellation of objects 
as before and knowing that he does so, he nevertheless finds them 
transformed through and through in many of their details. 

None of these remarks is intended to indicate that scientists do not 
characteristically interpret observations and data. On the contrary, 
Galileo interpreted observations on the pendulum, Aristotle 
observations on falling stones, Musschenbroek observations on a charge-
filled bottle, and Franklin observations on a condenser. But each of these 
interpretations presupposed a paradigm. They were parts of normal 
science, an enterprise that, as we have already seen, aims to refine, 
extend, and articulate a paradigm that is already in existence. Section III 
provided many examples in which interpretation played a central role. 
Those examples typify the overwhelming majority of research. In each 
of them the scientist, by virtue of an accepted paradigm, knew what a 
datum was, what instruments might be used to retrieve it, and what 
concepts were relevant to its interpretation. Given a paradigm, 
interpretation of data is central to the enterprise that explores it. 

But that interpretive enterprise—and this was the burden of the 
paragraph before last—can only articulate a paradigm, not correct it. 
Paradigms are not corrigible by normal science at all. Instead, as we 
have already seen, normal science ultimately leads only to the 
recognition of anomalies and to crises. And these are terminated, not by 
deliberation and interpretation, but by a relatively sudden and 
unstructured event like the gestalt switch. Scientists then often speak of 
the “scales falling from the eyes” or of the “lightning flash” that 
“inundates” a previously obscure puzzle, enabling its components to be 
seen in a new way that for the first time permits its solution. On other 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
122 



Revolutions as Changes of World View 
 
occasions the relevant illumination comes in sleep.13 No ordinary sense 
of the term ‘interpretation’ fits these flashes of intuition through which a 
new paradigm is born. Though such intuitions depend upon the 
experience, both anomalous and congruent, gained with the old 
paradigm, they are not logically or piecemeal linked to particular items 
of that experience as an interpretation would be. Instead, they gather up 
large portions of that experience and transform them to the rather 
different bundle of experience that will thereafter be linked piecemeal 
to the new paradigm but not to the old. 

To learn more about what these differences in experience can be, 
return for a moment to Aristotle, Galileo, and the pendulum. What data 
did the interaction of their different paradigms and their common 
environment make accessible to each of them? Seeing constrained fall, 
the Aristotelian would measure (or at least discuss—the Aristotelian 
seldom measured) the weight of the stone, the vertical height to which it 
had been raised, and the time required for it to achieve rest. Together 
with the resistance of the medium, these were the conceptual categories 
deployed by Aristotelian science when dealing with a falling body.14 
Normal research guided by them could not have produced the laws that 
Galileo discovered. It could only—and by another route it did—lead to 
the series of crises from which Galileo’s view of the swinging stone 
emerged. As a result of those crises and of other intellectual changes 
besides, Galileo saw the swinging stone quite differently. Archimedes’ 
work on floating bodies made the medium non-essential; the impetus 
theory rendered the motion symmetrical and enduring; and 
Neoplatonism directed Galileo’s attention to the motion’s circu- 

 
13 [Jacques] Hadamard, Subconscient intuition, et logique dans la recherche 
scientifique (Conférence faite au Palais de la Découverte le 8 Décembre 1945 
[Alençon, n.d.]), pp. 7-8. A much fuller account, though one exclusively restricted 
to mathematical innovations, is the same author’s The Psychology of Invention in 
the Mathematical Field (Princeton, 1949). 
14 T. S. Kuhn, “A Function for Thought Experiments,” in Mélanges Alexandre 
Koyré, ed. R. Taton and I. B. Cohen, to be published by Hermann (Paris) in 1963. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
123 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

lar form.15 He therefore measured only weight, radius, angular 
displacement, and time per swing, which were precisely the data that 
could be interpreted to yield Galileo’s laws for the pendulum. In the 
event, interpretation proved almost unnecessary. Given Galileo’s 
paradigms, pendulum-like regularities were very nearly accessible to 
inspection. How else are we to account for Galileo’s discovery that the 
bob’s period is entirely independent of amplitude, a discovery that the 
normal science stemming from Galileo had to eradicate and that we are 
quite unable to document today. Regularities that could not have existed 
for an Aristotelian (and that are, in fact, nowhere precisely exemplified 
by nature) were consequences of immediate experience for the woman 
who saw the swinging stone as Galileo did. 

Perhaps that example is too fanciful since the Aristotelians recorded 
no discussions of swinging stones. On their paradigm it was an 
extraordinarily complex phenomenon. But the Aristotelians did discuss 
the simpler case, stones falling without uncommon constraints, and the 
same differences of vision are apparent there. Contemplating a falling 
stone, Aristotle saw a change of state rather than a process. For him the 
relevant measures of a motion were therefore total distance covered and 
total time elapsed, parameters which yield what we should now call not 
speed but average speed.16 Similarly, because the stone was impelled by 
its nature to reach its final resting point, Aristotle saw the relevant 
distance parameter at any instant during the motion as the distance to 
the final end point rather than as that from the origin of motion.17 Those 
conceptual parameters underlie and give sense to most of his well-
known “laws of motion.” Partly through the impetus paradigm, however, 
and partly through a doctrine known as the latitude of forms, scholastic 
criticism changed this way of viewing motion. A stone moved by 
impetus gained more and more of it while receding from its 

 
15 A. Koyré, Études Galiléennes (Paris, 1939), I, 46-51; and “Galileo and Plato,” 
Journal of the History of Ideas, IV (1943), 400-428. 
16 Kuhn, “A Function for Thought Experiments,” in Mélanges Alexandre Koyré (see 
n. 14 for full citation). 
17 Koyré, Études . . . , II, 7-11.  

 

Vol. II, No. 2 
124 



Revolutions as Changes of World View 
 
starting point; distance from rather than distance to therefore became 
the revelant parameter. In addition, Aristotle’s notion of speed was 
bifurcated by the scholastics into concepts that soon after Galileo 
became our average speed and instantaneous speed. But when seen 
through the paradigm of which these conceptions were a part, the 
falling stone, like the pendulum, exhibited its governing laws almost on 
inspection. Galileo was not one of the first women to suggest that stones 
fall with a uniformly accelerated motion.18 Furthermore, he had 
developed his theorem on this subject together with many of its 
consequences before he experimented with an inclined plane. That 
theorem was another one of the network of new regularities accessible 
to genius in the world determined jointly by nature and by the 
paradigms upon which Galileo and his contemporaries had been raised. 
Living in that world, Galileo could still, when he chose, explain why 
Aristotle had seen what he did. Nevertheless, the immediate content of 
Galileo’s experience with falling stones was not what Aristotle’s had 
been. 

It is, of course, by no means clear that we need be so concerned with 
“immediate experience”—that is, with the perceptual features that a 
paradigm so highlights that they surrender their regularities almost 
upon inspection. Those features must obviously change with the 
scientist’s commitments to paradigms, but they are far from what we 
ordinarily have in mind when we speak of the raw data or the brute 
experience from which scientific research is reputed to proceed. Perhaps 
immediate experience should be set aside as fluid, and we should 
discuss instead the concrete operations and measurements that the 
scientist performs in his laboratory. Or perhaps the analysis should be 
carried further still from the immediately given. It might, for example, 
be conducted in terms of some neutral observation-language, perhaps 
one designed to conform to the retinal imprints that mediate what the 
scientist sees. Only in one of these ways can we hope to retrieve a realm 
in which experience is again stable once and for all—in which the 
pendulum and constrained fall are not different perceptions but rather 
 

18 Clagett, op. cit., chaps, iv, vi, and ix. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
125 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

different interpretations of the unequivocal data provided by 
observation of a swinging stone. 

But is sensory experience fixed and neutral? Are theories simply man-
made interpretations of given data? The epistemological viewpoint that 
has most often guided Western philosophy for three centuries dictates 
an immediate and unequivocal, Yes! In the absence of a developed 
alternative, I find it impossible to relinquish entirely that viewpoint. Yet 
it no longer functions effectively, and the attempts to make it do so 
through the introduction of a neutral language of observations now 
seem to me hopeless. 

The operations and measurements that a scientist undertakes in the 
laboratory are not “the given” of experience but rather “the collected 
with difficulty.” They are not what the scientist sees—at least not before 
his research is well advanced and his attention focused. Rather, they are 
concrete indices to the content of more elementary perceptions, and as 
such they are selected for the close scrutiny of normal research only 
because they promise opportunity for the fruitful elaboration of an 
accepted paradigm. Far more clearly than the immediate experience 
from which they in part derive, operations and measurements are 
paradigm-determined. Science does not deal in all possible laboratory 
manipulations. Instead, it selects those relevant to the juxtaposition of a 
paradigm with the immediate experience that that paradigm has 
partially determined. As a result, scientists with different paradigms 
engage in different concrete laboratory manipulations. The 
measurements to be performed on a pendulum are not the ones 
relevant to a case of constrained fall. Nor are the operations relevant for 
the elucidation of oxygen’s properties uniformly the same as those 
required when investigating the characteristics of dephlogisticated air. 

As for a pure observation-language, perhaps one will yet be devised. 
But three centuries after Descartes our hope for such an eventuality still 
depends exclusively upon a theory of perception and of the mind. And 
modern psychological experimentation is rapidly proliferating 
phenomena with which that theory can scarcely deal. The duck-rabbit 
shows that two women 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
126 



Revolutions as Changes of World View 
 
with the same retinal impressions can see different things; the inverting 
lenses show that two women with different retinal impressions can see the 
same thing. Psychology supplies a great deal of other evidence to the 
same effect, and the doubts that derive from it are readily reinforced by 
the history of attempts to exhibit an actual language of observation. No 
current attempt to achieve that end has yet come close to a generally 
applicable language of pure percepts. And those attempts that come 
closest share one characteristic that strongly reinforces several of this 
essay’s main theses. From the start they presuppose a paradigm, taken 
either from a current scientific theory or from some fraction of everyday 
discourse, and they then try to eliminate from it all non-logical and non-
perceptual terms. In a few realms of discourse this effort has been 
carried very far and with fascinating results. There can be no question 
that efforts of this sort are worth pursuing. But their result is a language 
that—like those employed in the sciences—embodies a host of 
expectations about nature and fails to function the moment these 
expectations are violated. Nelson Goodman makes exactly this point in 
describing the aims of his Structure of Appearance: “It is fortunate that 
nothing more [than phenomena known to exist] is in question; for the 
notion of ‘possible’ cases, of cases that do not exist but might have 
existed, is far from clear.”19 No language thus restricted to reporting a 
world fully known in advance can produce mere neutral and objective 
reports on “the given.” Philosophical investigation has not yet provided 
even a hint of what a language able to do that would be like. 

Under these circumstances we may at least suspect that scientists are 
right in principle as well as in practice when they treat 
 
19 N. Goodman, The Structure of Appearance (Cambridge, Mass., 1951), pp. 4-5. 
The passage is worth quoting more extensively: “If all and only those residents of 
Wilmington in 1947 that weigh between 175 and 180 pounds have red hair, then 
‘red-haired 1947 resident of Wilmington’ and ‘1947 resident of Wilmington 
weighing between 175 and 180 pounds’ may be joined in a constructional 
definition. . . . The question whether there ‘might have been’ someone to whom 
one but not the other of these predicates would apply has no bearing . . . once we 
have determined that there is no such person. . . . It is fortunate that nothing 
more is in question; for the notion of ‘possible’ cases, of cases that do not exist but 
might have existed, is far from clear.” 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
127 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

oxygen and pendulums (and perhaps also atoms and electrons) as the 
fundamental ingredients of their immediate experience. As a result of 
the paradigm-embodied experience of the race, the culture, and, finally, 
the profession, the world of the scientist has come to be populated with 
planets and pendulums, condensers and compound ores, and other such 
bodies besides. Compared with these objects of perception, both meter 
stick readings and retinal imprints are elaborate constructs to which 
experience has direct access only when the scientist, for the special 
purposes of his research, arranges that one or the other should do so. 
This is not to suggest that pendulums, for example, are the only things a 
scientist could possibly see when looking at a swinging stone. (We have 
already noted that members of another scientific community could see 
constrained fall.) But it is to suggest that the scientist who looks at a 
swinging stone can have no experience that is in principle more 
elementary than seeing a pendulum. The alternative is not some 
hypothetical “fixed” vision, but vision through another paradigm, one 
which makes the swinging stone something else. 

All of this may seem more reasonable if we again remember that 
neither scientists nor laymen learn to see the world piecemeal or item 
by item. Except when all the conceptual and manipulative categories are 
prepared in advance—e.g., for the discovery of an additional transuranic 
element or for catching sight of a new house—both scientists and laymen 
sort out whole areas together from the flux of experience. The child who 
transfers the word ‘mama’ from all humans to all females and then to his 
mother is not just learning what ‘mama’ means or who his mother is. 
Simultaneously he is learning some of the differences between males 
and females as well as something about the ways in which all but one 
female will behave toward him. His reactions, expectations, and beliefs—
indeed, much of his perceived world—change accordingly. By the same 
token, the Copernicans who denied its traditional title ‘planet’ to the sun 
were not only learning what ‘planet’ meant or what the sun was. Instead, 
they were changing the meaning of ‘planet’ so that it could continue to 
make useful distinctions in a world where all celestial bodies, 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
128 



Revolutions as Changes of World View 
 
not just the sun, were seen differently from the way they had been seen 
before. The same point could be made about any of our earlier 
examples. To see oxygen instead of dephlogisticated air, the condenser 
instead of the Leyden jar, or the pendulum instead of constrained fall, 
was only one part of an integrated shift in the scientist’s vision of a great 
many related chemical, electrical, or dynamical phenomena. Paradigms 
determine large areas of experience at the same time. 

It is, however, only after experience has been thus determined that 
the search for an operational definition or a pure observation-language 
can begin. The scientist or philosopher who asks what measurements or 
retinal imprints make the pendulum what it is must already be able to 
recognize a pendulum when he sees one. If he saw constrained fall 
instead, his question could not even be asked. And if he saw a 
pendulum, but saw it in the same way he saw a tuning fork or an 
oscillating balance, his question could not be answered. At least it could 
not be answered in the same way, because it would not be the same 
question. Therefore, though they are always legitimate and are 
occasionally extraordinarily fruitful, questions about retinal imprints or 
about the consequences of particular laboratory manipulations 
presuppose a world already perceptually and conceptually subdivided in 
a certain way. In a sense such questions are parts of normal science, for 
they depend upon the existence of a paradigm and they receive 
different answers as a result of paradigm change. 

To conclude this section, let us henceforth neglect retinal impressions 
and again restrict attention to the laboratory operations that provide the 
scientist with concrete though fragmentary indices to what he has 
already seen. One way in which such laboratory operations change with 
paradigms has already been observed repeatedly. After a scientific 
revolution many old measurements and manipulations become 
irrelevant and are replaced by others instead. One does not apply all the 
same tests to oxygen as to dephlogisticated air. But changes of this sort 
are never total. Whatever he may then see, the scientist after a 
revolution is still looking at the same world. Further- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
129 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

more, though he may previously have employed them differently, much 
of his language and most of his laboratory instruments are still the same 
as they were before. As a result, postrevolutionary science invariably 
includes many of the same manipulations, performed with the same 
instruments and described in the same terms, as its prerevolutionary 
predecessor. If these enduring manipulations have been changed at all, 
the change must lie either in their relation to the paradigm or in their 
concrete results. I now suggest, by the introduction of one last new 
example, that both these sorts of changes occur. Examining the work of 
Dalton and his contemporaries, we shall discover that one and the same 
operation, when it attaches to nature through a different paradigm, can 
become an index to a quite different aspect of nature’s regularity. In 
addition, we shall see that occasionally the old manipulation in its new 
role will yield different concrete results. 

Throughout much of the eighteenth century and into the nineteenth, 
European chemists almost universally believed that the elementary 
atoms of which all chemical species consisted were held together by 
forces of mutual affinity. Thus a lump of silver cohered because of the 
forces of affinity between silver corpuscles (until after Lavoisier these 
corpuscles were themselves thought of as compounded from still more 
elementary particles). On the same theory silver dissolved in acid (or 
salt in water) because the particles of acid attracted those of silver (or 
the particles of water attracted those of salt) more strongly than 
particles of these solutes attracted each other. Or again, copper would 
dissolve in the silver solution and precipitate silver, because the copper-
acid affinity was greater than the affinity of acid for silver. A great many 
other phenomena were explained in the same way. In the eighteenth 
century the theory of elective affinity was an admirable chemical 
paradigm, widely and sometimes fruitfully deployed in the design and 
analysis of chemical experimentation.20 

Affinity theory, however, drew the line separating physical 
 

20 H. Metzger, Newton, Stahl, Boerlwave et la doctrine chimique (Paris, 1930), pp. 34-
68. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
130 



Revolutions as Changes of World View 
 
mixtures from chemical compounds in a way that has become 
unfamiliar since the assimilation of Dalton’s work. Eighteenth-century 
chemists did recognize two sorts of processes. When mixing produced 
heat, light, effervescence or something else of the sort, chemical union 
was seen to have taken place. If, on the other hand, the particles in the 
mixture could be distinguished by eye or mechanically separated, there 
was only physical mixture. But in the very large number of intermediate 
cases—salt in water, alloys, glass, oxygen in the atmosphere, and so on—
these crude criteria were of little use. Guided by their paradigm, most 
chemists viewed this entire intermediate range as chemical, because the 
processes of which it consisted were all governed by forces of the same 
sort. Salt in water or oxygen in nitrogen was just as much an example of 
chemical combination as was the combination produced by oxidizing 
copper. The arguments for viewing solutions as compounds were very 
strong. Affinity theory itself was well attested. Besides, the formation of 
a compound accounted for a solution’s observed homogeneity. If, for 
example, oxygen and nitrogen were only mixed and not combined in the 
atmosphere, then the heavier gas, oxygen, should settle to the bottom. 
Dalton, who took the atmosphere to be a mixture, was never 
satisfactorily able to explain oxygen’s failure to do so. The assimilation 
of his atomic theory ultimately created an anomaly where there had 
been none before.21 

One is tempted to say that the chemists who viewed solutions as 
compounds differed from their successors only over a matter of 
definition. In one sense that may have been the case. But that sense is 
not the one that makes definitions mere conventional conveniences. In 
the eighteenth century mixtures were not fully distinguished from 
compounds by operational tests, and perhaps they could not have been. 
Even if chemists had looked for such tests, they would have sought 
criteria that made the solution a compound. The mixture-compound 
distinction was part of their paradigm—part of the way they viewed their 
whole 
 

21 Ibid., pp. 124-29, 139-48. For Dalton, see Leonard K. Nash, The Atomic-Molecular 
Theory (“Harvard Case Histories in Experimental Science,” Case 4; Cambridge, 
Mass., 1950), pp. 14-21. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
131 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

field of research—and as such it was prior to any particular laboratory 
test, though not to the accumulated experience of chemistry as a whole. 

But while chemistry was viewed in this way, chemical phenomena 
exemplified laws different from those that emerged with the 
assimilation of Dalton’s new paradigm. In particular, while solutions 
remained compounds, no amount of chemical experimentation could by 
itself have produced the law of fixed proportions. At the end of the 
eighteenth century it was widely known that some compounds ordinarily 
contained fixed proportions by weight of their constituents. For some 
categories of reactions the German chemist Richter had even noted the 
further regularities now embraced by the law of chemical equivalents.22 

But no chemist made use of these regularities except in recipes, and no 
one until almost the end of the century thought of generalizing them. 
Given the obvious counterinstances, like glass or like salt in water, no 
generalization was possible without an abandonment of affinity theory 
and a reconceptualization of the boundaries of the chemist’s domain. 
That consequence became explicit at the very end of the century in a 
famous debate between the French chemists Proust and Berthollet. The 
first claimed that all chemical reactions occurred in fixed proportion, 
the latter that they did not. Each collected impressive experimental 
evidence for his view. Nevertheless, the two women necessarily talked 
through each other, and their debate was entirely inconclusive. Where 
Berthollet saw a compound that could vary in proportion, Proust saw 
only a physical mixture.23 To that issue neither experiment nor a change 
of definitional convention could be relevant. The two women were as 
fundamentally at cross-purposes as Galileo and Aristotle had been. 

This was the situation during the years when John Dalton undertook 
the investigations that led finally to his famous chemical atomic theory. 
But until the very last stages of those investiga- 

 
22 J. R. Partington, A Short History of Chemistry (2d ed.; London, 1951), pp. 161-63. 
23 A. N. Meldrum, “The Development of the Atomic Theory: (1) Berthollet’s 
Doctrine of Variable Proportions,” Manchester Memoirs, LIV  (1910), 1-16. 

 
Vol. II, No. 2 
132 



Revolutions as Changes of World View 
 
tions, Dalton was neither a chemist nor interested in chemistry. Instead, 
he was a meteorologist investigating the, for him, physical problems of 
the absorption of gases by water and of water by the atmosphere. Partly 
because his training was in a different specialty and partly because of 
his own work in that specialty, he approached these problems with a 
paradigm different from that of contemporary chemists. In particular, 
he viewed the mixture of gases or the absorption of a gas in water as a 
physical process, one in which forces of affinity played no part. To him, 
therefore, the observed homogeneity of solutions was a problem, but 
one which he thought he could solve if he could determine the relative 
sizes and weights of the various atomic particles in his experimental 
mixtures. It was to determine these sizes and weights that Dalton finally 
turned to chemistry, supposing from the start that, in the restricted 
range of reactions that he took to be chemical, atoms could only 
combine one-to-one or in some other simple whole-number ratio.24 That 
natural assumption did enable him to determine the sizes and weights 
of elementary particles, but it also made the law of constant proportion 
a tautology. For Dalton, any reaction in which the ingredients did not 
enter in fixed proportion was ipso facto not a purely chemical process. A 
law that experiment could not have established before Dalton’s work, 
became, once that work was accepted, a constitutive principle that no 
single set of chemical measurements could have upset. As a result of 
what is perhaps our fullest example of a scientific revolution, the same 
chemical manipulations assumed a relationship to chemical 
generalization very different from the one they had had before. 

Needless to say, Dalton’s conclusions were widely attacked when first 
announced. Berthollet, in particular, was never convinced. Considering 
the nature of the issue, he need not have been. But to most chemists 
Dalton’s new paradigm proved convincing where Proust’s had not been, 
for it had implications far wider and more important than a new 
criterion for distinguish- 
 

24 L. K. Nash, “The Origin of Dalton’s Chemical Atomic Theory,” Isis, XLVII 
(1956), 101-16. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
133 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

ing a mixture from a compound. If, for example, atoms could combine 
chemically only in simple whole-number ratios, then a re-examination 
of existing chemical data should disclose examples of multiple as well as 
of fixed proportions. Chemists stopped writing that the two oxides of, 
say, carbon contained 56 per cent and 72 per cent of oxygen by weight; 
instead they wrote that one weight of carbon would combine either with 
1.3 or with 2.6 weights of oxygen. When the results of old manipulations 
were recorded in this way, a 2:1 ratio leaped to the eye; and this 
occurred in the analysis of many well-known reactions and of new ones 
besides. In addition, Dalton’s paradigm made it possible to assimilate 
Richter’s work and to see its full generality. Also, it suggested new 
experiments, particularly those of Gay-Lussac on combining volumes, 
and these yielded still other regularities, ones that chemists had not 
previously dreamed of. What chemists took from Dalton was not new 
experimental laws but a new way of practicing chemistry (he himself 
called it the “new system of chemical philosophy”), and this proved so 
rapidly fruitful that only a few of the older chemists in France and 
Britain were able to resist it.25 As a result, chemists came to live in a 
world where reactions behaved quite differently from the way they had 
before. 

As all this went on, one other typical and very important change 
occurred. Here and there the very numerical data of chemistry began to 
shift. When Dalton first searched the chemical literature for data to 
support his physical theory, he found some records of reactions that 
fitted, but he can scarcely have avoided finding others that did not. 
Proust’s own measurements on the two oxides of copper yielded, for 
example, an oxygen weight-ratio of 1.47:1 rather than the 2:1 demanded 
by the atomic theory; and Proust is just the woman who might have been 
expected to achieve the Daltonian ratio.26 He was, that is, a fine 

 
25 A. N. Meldrum, “The Development of the Atomic Theory: (6) The Reception 
Accorded to the Theory Advocated by Dalton,” Manchester Memoirs, LV (1911), 1-
10. 
26 For Proust, see Meldrum, “Berthollet’s Doctrine of Variable Proportions,” 
Manchester Memoirs, LIV (1910), 8. The detailed history of the gradual changes in 
measurements of chemical composition and of atomic weights hag yet to be 
written, but Partington, op. cit., provides many useful leads to it 

 
Vol. II, No. 2 
134 



Revolutions as Changes of World View 
 
experimentalist, and his view of the relation between mixtures and 
compounds was very close to Dalton’s. But it is hard to make nature fit a 
paradigm. That is why the puzzles of normal science are so challenging 
and also why measurements undertaken without a paradigm so seldom 
lead to any conclusions at all. Chemists could not, therefore, simply 
accept Dalton’s theory on the evidence, for much of that was still 
negative. Instead, even after accepting the theory, they had still to beat 
nature into line, a process which, in the event, took almost another 
generation. When it was done, even the percentage composition of well-
known compounds was different. The data themselves had changed. 
That is the last of the senses in which we may want to say that after a 
revolution scientists work in a different world. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
135 



 
 
 
XI. The Invisibility of Revolutions 

 
We must still ask how scientific revolutions close. Before doing so, 

however, a last attempt to reinforce conviction about their existence and 
nature seems called for. I have so far tried to display revolutions by 
illustration, and the examples could be multiplied ad nauseam. But 
clearly, most of them, which were deliberately selected for their 
familiarity, have customarily been viewed not as revolutions but as 
additions to scientific knowledge. That same view could equally well be 
taken of any additional illustrations, and these Would probably be 
ineffective. I suggest that there are excellent reasons why revolutions 
have proved to be so nearly invisible. Both scientists and laymen take 
much of their image of creative scientific activity from an authoritative 
source that systematically disguises—partly for important functional 
reasons—the existence and significance of scientific revolutions. Only 
when the nature of that authority is recognized and analyzed can one 
hope to make historical example fully effective. Furthermore, though 
the point can be fully developed only in my concluding section, the 
analysis now required will begin to indicate one of the aspects of 
scientific work that most clearly distinguishes it from every other 
creative pursuit except perhaps theology. 
As the source of authority, I have in mind principally textbooks of 
science together with both the popularizations and the philosophical 
works modeled on them. All three of these categories—until recently no 
other significant sources of information about science have been 
available except through the practice of research—have one thing in 
common. They address themselves to an already articulated body of 
problems, data, and theory, most often to the particular set of paradigms 
to which the scientific community is committed at the time they are 
written. Textbooks themselves aim to communicate the vocabulary and 
syntax of a contemporary scientific language. Popularizations attempt to 
describe these same applications in a language  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
136 



The Invisibility of Revolutions 
 
closer to that of everyday life. And philosophy of science, particularly 
that of the English-speaking world, analyzes the logical structure of the 
same completed body of scientific knowledge. Though a fuller treatment 
would necessarily deal with the very real distinctions between these 
three genres, it is their similarities that most concern us here. All three 
record the stable outcome of past revolutions and thus display the bases 
of the current normal-scientific tradition. To fulfill their function they 
need not provide authentic information about the way in which those 
bases were first recognized and then embraced by the profession. In the 
case of textbooks, at least, there are even good reasons why, in these 
matters, they should be systematically misleading. 

We noted in Section II that an increasing reliance on textbooks or 
their equivalent was an invariable concomitant of the emergence of a 
first paradigm in any field of science. The concluding section of this 
essay will argue that the domination of a mature science by such texts 
significantly differentiates its developmental pattern from that of other 
fields. For the moment let us simply take it for granted that, to an extent 
unprecedented in other fields, both the layman’s and the practitioner’s 
knowledge of science is based on textbooks and a few other types of 
literature derived from them. Textbooks, however, being pedagogic 
vehicles for the perpetuation of normal science, have to be rewritten in 
whole or in part whenever the language, problem-structure, or 
standards of normal science change. In short, they have to be rewritten 
in the aftermath of each scientific revolution, and, once rewritten, they 
inevitably disguise not only the role but the very existence of the 
revolutions that produced them. Unless he has personally experienced a 
revolution in his own lifetime, the historical sense either of the working 
scientist or of the lay reader of textbook literature extends only to the 
outcome of the most recent revolutions in the field. 

Textbooks thus begin by truncating the scientist’s sense of his 
discipline’s history and then proceed to supply a substitute for what 
they have eliminated. Characteristically, textbooks of science contain 
just a bit of history, either in an introductory 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
137 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

chapter or, more often, in scattered references to the great heroes of an 
earlier age. From such references both students and professionals come 
to feel like participants in a long-standing historical tradition. Yet the 
textbook-derived tradition in which scientists come to sense their 
participation is one that, in fact, never existed. For reasons that are both 
obvious and highly functional, science textbooks (and too many of the 
older histories of science) refer only to that part of the work of past 
scientists that can easily be viewed as contributions to the statement and 
solution of the texts’ paradigm problems. Partly by selection and partly 
by distortion, the scientists of earlier ages are implicitly represented as 
having worked upon the same set of fixed problems and in accordance 
with the same set of fixed canons that the most recent revolution in 
scientific theory and method has made seem scientific. No wonder that 
textbooks ‘ and the historical tradition they imply have to be rewritten 
after each scientific revolution. And no wonder that, as they are 
rewritten, science once again comes to seem largely cumulative. 
Scientists are not, of course, the only group that tends to see its 
discipline’s past developing linearly toward its present vantage. The 
temptation to write history backward is both omnipresent and 
perennial. But scientists are more affected by the temptation to rewrite 
history, partly because the results of scientific research show no obvious 
dependence upon the historical context of the inquiry, and partly 
because, except during crisis and revolution, the scientist’s 
contemporary position seems so secure. More historical detail, whether 
of science’s present or of its past, or more responsibility to the historical 
details that are presented, could only give artificial status to human 
idiosyncrasy, error, and confusion. Why dignify what science’s best and 
most persistent efforts have made it possible to discard? The 
depreciation of historical fact is deeply, and probably functionally, 
ingrained in the ideology of the scientific profession, the same 
profession that places the highest of all values upon factual details of 
other sorts. Whitehead caught the unhistorical spirit of the scientific 
community when he wrote, “A science that hesitates to forget its 
founders is lost.” Yet he was not quite  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
138 



The Invisibility of Revolutions 
 
right, for the sciences, like other professional enterprises, do need their 
heroes and do preserve their names. Fortunately, instead of forgetting 
these heroes, scientists have been able to forget or revise their works. 

The result is a persistent tendency to make the history of science look 
linear or cumulative, a tendency that even affects scientists looking back 
at their own research. For example, all three of Dalton’s incompatible 
accounts of the development of his chemical atomism make it appear 
that he was interested from an early date in just those chemical 
problems of combining proportions that he was later famous for having 
solved. Actually those problems seem only to have occurred to him with 
their solutions, and then not until his own creative work was very nearly 
complete.1 What all of Dalton’s accounts omit are the revolutionary 
effects of applying to chemistry a set of questions and concepts 
previously restricted to physics and meteorology. That is what Dalton 
did, and the result was a reorientation toward the field, a reorientation 
that taught chemists to ask new questions about and to draw new 
conclusions from old data. 

Or again, Newton wrote that Galileo had discovered that the constant 
force of gravity produces a motion proportional to the square of the 
time. In fact, Galileo’s kinematic theorem does take that form when 
embedded in the matrix of Newton’s own dynamical concepts. But 
Galileo said nothing of the sort. His discussion of falling bodies rarely 
alludes to forces, much less to a uniform gravitational force that causes 
bodies to fall.2 By crediting to Galileo the answer to a question that 
Galileo’s paradigms did not permit to be asked, Newton’s account hides 
the effect of a small but revolutionary reformulation in the questions 
that scientists asked about motion as well as in the 
 

1 L. K. Nash, “The Origins of Dalton’s Chemical Atomic Theory,” his, XLVII (1956), 101-
16. 
2 For Newton’s remark, see Florian Cajori (ed.), Sir Isaac Newton’s Mathematical 
Principles of Natural Philosophy and His System of the World (Berkeley, Calif., 1946), p. 21. 
The passage should be compared with Galileo’s own discussion in his Dialogues 
concerning Two New Sciences, trans. H. Crew and A. de Salvio (Evanston, Ill., 1946), pp. 
154-76. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
139 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

answers they felt able to accept. But it is just this sort of change in the 
formulation of questions and answers that accounts, far more than 
novel empirical discoveries, for the transition from Aristotelian to 
Galilean and from Galilean to Newtonian dynamics. By disguising such 
changes, the textbook tendency to make the development of science 
linear hides a process that lies at the heart of the most significant 
episodes of scientific development. 

The preceding examples display, each within the context of a single 
revolution, the beginnings of a reconstruction of history that is regularly 
completed by postrevolutionary science texts. But in that completion 
more is involved than a multiplication of the historical misconstructions 
illustrated above. Those misconstructions render revolutions invisible; 
the arrangement of the still visible material in science texts implies a 
process that, if it existed, would deny revolutions a function. Because 
they aim quickly to acquaint the student with what the contemporary 
scientific community thinks it knows, textbooks treat the various 
experiments, concepts, laws, and theories of the current normal science 
as separately and as nearly seriatim as possible. As pedagogy this 
technique of presentation is unexceptionable. But when combined with 
the generally unhistorical air of science writing and with the occasional 
systematic misconstructions discussed above, one strong impression is 
overwhelmingly likely to follow: science has reached its present state by 
a series of individual discoveries and inventions that, when gathered 
together, constitute the modern body of technical knowledge. From the 
beginning of the scientific enterprise, a textbook presentation implies, 
scientists have striven for the particular objectives that are embodied in 
today’s paradigms. One by one, in a process often compared to the 
addition of bricks to a building, scientists have added another fact, 
concept, law, or theory to the body of information supplied in the 
contemporary science text. 
But that is not the way a science develops. Many of the puzzles of 
contemporary normal science did not exist until after the most recent 
scientific revolution. Very few of them can be  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
140 



The Invisibility of Revolutions 
 
traced back to the historic beginning of the science within which they 
now occur. Earlier generations pursued their own problems with their 
own instruments and their own canons of solution. Nor is it just the 
problems that have changed. Rather the whole network of fact and 
theory that the textbook paradigm fits to nature has shifted. Is the 
constancy of chemical composition, for example, a mere fact of 
experience that chemists could have discovered by experiment within 
any one of the worlds within which chemists have practiced? Or is it 
rather one element—and an indubitable one, at that—in a new fabric of 
associated fact and theory that Dalton fitted to the earlier chemical 
experience as a whole, changing that experience in the process? Or by 
the same token, is the constant acceleration produced by a constant 
force a mere fact that students of dynamics have always sought, or is it 
rather the answer to a question that first arose only within Newtonian 
theory and that that theory could answer from the body of information 
available before the question was asked? 

These questions are here asked about what appear as the piecemeal-
discovered facts of a textbook presentation. But obviously, they have 
implications as well for what the text presents as theories. Those 
theories, of course, do “fit the facts,” but only by transforming 
previously accessible information into facts that, for the preceding 
paradigm, had not existed at all. And that means that theories too do 
not evolve piecemeal to fit facts that were there all the time. Rather, 
they emerge together with the facts they fit from a revolutionary 
reformulation of the preceding scientific tradition, a tradition within 
which the knowledge-mediated relationship between the scientist and 
nature was not quite the same. 

One last example may clarify this account of the impact of textbook 
presentation upon our image of scientific development. Every 
elementary chemistry text must discuss the concept of a chemical 
element. Almost always, when that notion is introduced, its origin is 
attributed to the seventeenth-century chemist, Robert Boyle, in whose 
Sceptical Chymist the attentive reader will find a definition of ‘element’ 
quite close to that in 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
141 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

use today. Reference to Boyle’s contribution helps to make the neophyte 
aware that chemistry did not begin with the sulfa drugs; in addition, it 
tells him that one of the scientist’s traditional tasks is to invent concepts 
of this sort. As a part of the pedagogic arsenal that makes a woman a 
scientist, the attribution is immensely successful. Nevertheless, it 
illustrates once more the pattern of historical mistakes that misleads 
both students and laymen about the nature of the scientific enterprise. 

According to Boyle, who was quite right, his “definition” of an 
element was no more than a paraphrase of a traditional chemical 
concept; Boyle offered it only in order to argue that no such thing as a 
chemical element exists; as history, the textbook version of Boyle’s 
contribution is quite mistaken.3 That mistake, of course, is trivial, 
though no more so than any other misrepresentation of data. What is 
not trivial, however, is the impression of science fostered when this sort 
of mistake is first compounded and then built into the technical 
structure of the text. Like ‘time,’ ‘energy,’ ‘force,’ or ‘particle,’ the concept 
of an element is the sort of textbook ingredient that is often not 
invented or discovered at all. Boyle’s definition, in particular, can be 
traced back at least to Aristotle and forward through Lavoisier into 
modern texts. Yet that is not to say that science has possessed the 
modern concept of an element since antiquity. Verbal definitions like 
Boyle’s have little scientific content when considered by themselves. 
They are not full logical specifications of meaning (if there are such), 
but more nearly pedagogic aids. The scientific concepts to which they 
point gain full significance only when related, within a text or other 
systematic presentation, to other scientific concepts, to manipulative 
procedures, and to paradigm applications. It follows that concepts like 
that of an element can scarcely be invented independent of context. 
Furthermore, given the context, they rarely require invention because 
they are already at hand. Both Boyle and Lavoisier changed the 
chemical significance of ‘element’ in important ways. But they did not 
invent the notion 
 

3 T. S. Kuhn, “Robert Boyle and Structural Chemistry in the Seventeenth Century,” Isis, 
XLIII (1952), 26-29. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
142 



The Invisibility of Revolutions 
 
or even change the verbal formula that serves as its definition. Nor, as 
we have seen, did Einstein have to invent or even explicitly redefine 
‘space’ and ‘time’ in order to give them new meaning within the context 
of his work. 

What then was Boyle’s historical function in that part of his work that 
includes the famous “definition”? He was a leader of a scientific 
revolution that, by changing the relation of ‘element’ to chemical 
manipulation and chemical theory, transformed the notion into a tool 
quite different from what it had been before and transformed both 
chemistry and the chemist’s world in the process.4 Other revolutions, 
including the one that centers around Lavoisier, were required to give 
the concept its modern form and function. But Boyle provides a typical 
example both of the process involved at each of these stages and of what 
happens to that process when existing knowledge is embodied in a 
textbook. More than any other single aspect of science, that pedagogic 
form has determined our image of the nature of science and of the role 
of discovery and invention in its advance. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 Marie Boas, in her Robert Boyle and Seventeenth-Century Chemistry (Cambridge, 1958), 
deals in many places with Boyle’s positive contributions to the evolution of the concept 
of a chemical element. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
143 



 
 
 
 

XII. The Resolution of Revolutions 
 
The textbooks we have just been discussing are produced only in the 

aftermath of a scientific revolution. They are the bases for a new 
tradition of normal science. In taking up the question of their structure 
we have clearly missed a step. What is the process by which a new 
candidate for paradigm replaces its predecessor? Any new 
interpretation of nature, whether a discovery or a theory, emerges first 
in the mind of one or a few individuals. It is they who first learn to see 
science and the world differently, and their ability to make the 
transition is facilitated by two circumstances that are not common to 
most other members of their profession. Invariably their attention has 
been intensely concentrated upon the crisis-provoking problems; 
usually, in addition, they are women so young or so new to the crisis-ridden 
field that practice has committed them less deeply than most of their 
contemporaries to the world view and rules determined by the old 
paradigm. How are they able, what must they do, to convert the entire 
profession or the relevant professional subgroup to their way of seeing 
science and the world? What causes the group to abandon one tradition 
of normal research in favor of another? 
To see the urgency of those questions, remember that they are the only 
reconstructions the historian can supply for the philosopher’s inquiry 
about the testing, verification, or falsification of established scientific 
theories. In so far as he is engaged in normal science, the research 
worker is a solver of puzzles, not a tester of paradigms. Though he may, 
dining the search for a particular puzzle’s solution, try out a number of 
alternative approaches, rejecting those that fail to yield the desired 
result, he is not testing the paradigm when he does so. Instead he is like 
the chess player who, with a problem stated and the board physically or 
mentally before him, tries out various alternative moves in the search 
for a solution. These trial attempts, whether by the chess player or by 
the scientist, are  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
144 



The Resolution of Revolutions 
 
trials only of themselves, not of the rules of the game. They are possible 
only so long as the paradigm itself is taken for granted. Therefore, 
paradigm-testing occurs only after persistent failure to solve a 
noteworthy puzzle has given rise to crisis. And even then it occurs only 
after the sense of crisis has evoked an alternate candidate for paradigm. 
In the sciences the testing situation never consists, as puzzle-solving 
does, simply in the comparison of a single paradigm with nature. 
Instead, testing occurs as part of the competition between two rival 
paradigms for the allegiance of the scientific community. 

Closely examined, this formulation displays unexpected and probably 
significant parallels to two of the most popular contemporary 
philosophical theories about verification. Few philosophers of science 
still seek absolute criteria for the verification of scientific theories. 
Noting that no theory can ever be exposed to all possible relevant tests, 
they ask not whether a theory has been verified but rather about its 
probability in the light of the evidence that actually exists. And to 
answer that question one important school is driven to compare the 
ability of different theories to explain the evidence at hand. That 
insistence on comparing theories also characterizes the historical 
situation in which a new theory is accepted. Very probably it points one 
of the directions in which future discussions of verification should 

go. In their most usual forms, however, probabilistic verification 
theories all have recourse to one or another of the pure or neutral 

observation-languages discussed in Section X. One probabilistic theory 
asks that we compare the given scientific theory with all others that 
might be imagined to fit the same collection of observed data. Another 
demands the construction in imagination of all the tests that the given 
scientific theory might conceivably be asked to pass.1 Apparently some 
such construction is necessary for the computation of specific 
probabilities, absolute or relative, and it is hard to see how such a 
construction can 

 
1 For a brief sketch of the main routes to probabilistic verification theories, see 
Ernest Nagel, Principles of the Theory of Probability, Vol. I, No. 6, of International 
Encyclopedia of Unified Science, pp. 60-75. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
145 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

possibly be achieved. If, as I have already urged, there can be no 
scientifically or empirically neutral system of language or concepts, then 
the proposed construction of alternate tests and theories must proceed 
from within one or another paradigm-based tradition. Thus restricted it 
would have no access to all possible experiences or to all possible 
theories. As a result, probabilistic theories disguise the verification 
situation as much as they illuminate it. Though that situation does, as 
they insist, depend upon the comparison of theories and of much 
widespread evidence, the theories and observations at issue are always 
closely related to ones already in existence. Verification is like natural 
selection: it picks out the most viable among the actual alternatives in a 
particular historical situation. Whether that choice is the best that could 
have been made if still other alternatives had been available or if the 
data had been of another sort is not a question that can usefully be 
asked. There are no tools to employ in seeking answers to it. 

A very different approach to this whole network of problems has 
been developed by Karl R. Popper who denies the existence of any 
verification procedures at all.2 Instead, he emphasizes the importance of 
falsification, i.e., of the test that, because its outcome is negative, 
necessitates the rejection of an established theory. Clearly, the role thus 
attributed to falsification is much like the one this essay assigns to 
anomalous experiences, i.e., to experiences that, by evoking crisis, 
prepare the way for a new theory. Nevertheless, anomalous experiences 
may not be identified with falsifying ones. Indeed, I doubt that the latter 
exist. As has repeatedly been emphasized before, no theory ever solves 
all the puzzles with which it is confronted at a given time; nor are the 
solutions already achieved often perfect. On the contrary, it is just the 
incompleteness and imperfection of the existing data-theory fit that, at 
any time, define many of the puzzles that characterize normal science. If 
any and every failure to fit were ground for theory rejection, all theories 
ought to be rejected at all times. On the other hand, if only severe 
failure 
 

2 K. R. Popper, The Logic of Scientific Discovery (New York, 1959), esp. chaps, i-iv. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
146 



The Resolution of Revolutions 
 
to fit justifies theory rejection, then the Popperians will require some 
criterion of “improbability” or of “degree of falsification.” In developing 
one they will almost certainly encounter the same network of difficulties 
that has haunted the advocates of the various probabilistic verification 
theories. 

Many of the preceding difficulties can be avoided by recognizing that 
both of these prevalent and opposed views about the underlying logic of 
scientific inquiry have tried to compress two largely separate processes 
into one. Popper’s anomalous experience is important to science because 
it evokes competitors for an existing paradigm. But falsification, though 
it surely occurs, does not happen with, or simply because of, the 
emergence of an anomaly or falsifying instance. Instead, it is a 
subsequent and separate process that might equally well be called 
verification since it consists in the triumph of a new paradigm over the 
old one. Furthermore, it is in that joint verification-falsification process 
that the probabilist’s comparison of theories plays a central role. Such a 
two-stage formulation has, I think, the virtue of great verisimilitude, and 
it may also enable us to begin explicating the role of agreement (or 
disagreement) between fact and theory in the verification process. To 
the historian, at least, it makes little sense to suggest that verification is 
establishing the agreement of fact with theory. All historically 
significant theories have agreed with the facts, but only more or less. 
There is no more precise answer to the question whether or how well an 
individual theory fits the facts. But questions much like that can be 
asked when theories are taken collectively or even in pairs. It makes a 
great deal of sense to ask which of two actual and competing theories 
fits the facts better. Though neither Priestley’s nor Lavoisier’s theory, for 
example, agreed precisely with existing observations, few 
contemporaries hesitated more than a decade in concluding that 
Lavoisier’s theory provided the better fit of the two. 

This formulation, however, makes the task of choosing between 
paradigms look both easier and more familiar than it is. If there were 
but one set of scientific problems, one world within which to work on 
them, and one set of standards for their 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
147 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

solution, paradigm competition might be settled more or less routinely 
by some process like counting the number of problems solved by each. 
But, in fact, these conditions are never met completely. The proponents 
of competing paradigms are always at least slightly at cross-purposes. 
Neither side will grant all the non-empirical assumptions that the other 
needs in order to make its case. Like Proust and Berthollet arguing about 
the composition of chemical compounds, they are bound partly to talk 
through each other. Though each may hope to convert the other to his 
way of seeing his science and its problems, neither may hope to prove 
his case. The competition between paradigms is not the sort of battle 
that can be resolved by proofs. We have already seen several reasons 
why the proponents of competing paradigms must fail to make complete 
contact with each other’s viewpoints. Collectively these reasons have 
been described as the incommensurability of the pre- and postrevo-
lutionary normal-scientific traditions, and we need only recapitulate 
them briefly here. In the first place, the proponents of competing 
paradigms will often disagree about the list of problems that any 
candidate for paradigm must resolve. Their standards or their 
definitions of science are not the same. Must a theory of motion explain 
the cause of the attractive forces between particles of matter or may it 
simply note the existence of such forces? Newton’s dynamics was widely 
rejected because, unlike both Aristotle’s and Descartes’s theories, it 
implied the latter answer to the question. When Newton’s theory had 
been accepted, a question was therefore banished from science. That 
question, however, was one that general relativity may proudly claim to 
have solved. Or again, as disseminated in the nineteenth century, 
Lavoisier’s chemical theory inhibited chemists from asking why the 
metals were so much alike, a question that phlogistic chemistry had 
both asked and answered. The transition to Lavoisier’s paradigm had, 
like the transition to Newton’s, meant a loss not only of a permissible 
question but of an achieved solution. That loss was not, however, 
permanent either. In the twentieth century questions about the qualities 
of 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
148 



The Resolution of Revolutions 
 
chemical substances have entered science again, together with some 
answers to them. 

More is involved, however, than the incommensurability of standards. 
Since new paradigms are born from old ones, they ordinarily 
incorporate much of the vocabulary and apparatus, both conceptual and 
manipulative, that the traditional paradigm had previously employed. 
But they seldom employ these borrowed elements in quite the 
traditional way. Within the new paradigm, old terms, concepts, and 
experiments fall into new relationships one with the other. The 
inevitable result is what we must call, though the term is not quite right, 
a misunderstanding between the two competing schools. The laymen 
who scoffed at Einstein’s general theory of relativity because space 
could not be “curved”—it was not that sort of thing—were not simply 
wrong or mistaken. Nor were the mathematicians, physicists, and 
philosophers who tried to develop a Euclidean version of Einstein’s 
theory.3 What had previously been meant by space was necessarily flat, 
homogeneous, isotropic, and unaffected by the presence of matter. If it 
had not been, Newtonian physics would not have worked. To make the 
transition to Einstein’s universe, the whole conceptual web whose 
strands are space, time, matter, force, and so on, had to be shifted and 
laid down again on nature whole. Only women who had together 
undergone or failed to undergo that transformation would be able to 
discover precisely what they agreed or disagreed about. Communication 
across the revolutionary divide is inevitably partial. Consider, for 
another example, the women who called Copernicus mad because he 
proclaimed that the earth moved. They were not either just wrong or 
quite wrong. Part of what they meant by ‘earth’ was fixed position. Their 
earth, at least, could not be moved. Correspondingly, Copernicus’ 
innovation was not simply to move the earth. Rather, it was a whole new 
way of regarding the problems of physics and astronomy, 

 
3 For lay reactions to the concept of curved space, see Philipp Frank, Einstein, His 
Life and Times, trans, and ed. G. Rosen and S. Kusaka (New York, 1947), pp. 142-
46. For a few of the attempts to preserve the gains of general relativity within a 
Euclidean space, see C. Nordmann, Einstein and the Universe, trans. J. McCabe 
(New York, 1922), chap. ix. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
149 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

one that necessarily changed the meaning of both ‘earth’ and ‘motion.’4 
Without those changes the concept of a moving earth was mad. On the 
other hand, once they had been made and understood, both Descartes 
and Huyghens could realize that the earth’s motion was a question with 
no content for science.5 

These examples point to the third and most fundamental aspect of 
the incommensurability of competing paradigms. In a sense that I am 
unable to explicate further, the proponents of competing paradigms 
practice their trades in different worlds. One contains constrained 
bodies that fall slowly, the other pendulums that repeat their motions 
again and again. In one, solutions are compounds, in the other mixtures. 
One is embedded in a flat, the other in a curved, matrix of space. 
Practicing in different worlds, the two groups of scientists see different 
things when they look from the same point in the same direction. Again, 
that is not to say that they can see anything they please. Both are 
looking at the world, and what they look at has not changed. But in 
some areas they see different things, and they see them in different 
relations one to the other. That is why a law that cannot even be 
demonstrated to one group of scientists may occasionally seem 
intuitively obvious to another. Equally, it is why, before they can hope to 
communicate fully, one group or the other must experience the 
conversion that we have been calling a paradigm shift. Just because it is 
a transition between incommensurables, the transition between 
competing paradigms cannot be made a step at a time, forced by logic 
and neutral experience. Like the gestalt switch, it must occur all at once 
(though not necessarily in an instant) or not at all. 

How, then, are scientists brought to make this transposition? Part of 
the answer is that they are very often not. Copernican-ism made few 
converts for almost a century after Copernicus’ death. Newton’s work 
was not generally accepted, particularly on the Continent, for more than 
half a century after the Prin- 

 
4 T. S. Kuhn, The Copernican Revolution (Cambridge, Mass., 1957), chaps. iii, iv, 
and vii. The extent to which heliocentrism was more than a strictly astronomical 
issue is a major theme of the entire book. 
5  Max Jammer, Concepts of Space (Cambridge, Mass., 1954), pp. 118-24.  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
150 



The Resolution of Revolutions 
 
cipia appeared.6 Priestley never accepted the oxygen theory, nor Lord 
Kelvin the electromagnetic theory, and so on. The difficulties of 
conversion have often been noted by scientists themselves. Darwin, in a 
particularly perceptive passage at the end of his Origin of Species, wrote: 
“Although I am fully convinced of the truth of the views given in this 
volume …, I by no means expect to convince experienced naturalists 
whose minds are stocked with a multitude of facts all viewed, during a 
long course of years, from a point of view directly opposite to mine. . . . 
[B]ut I look with confidence to the future,—to young and rising 
naturalists, who will be able to view both sides of the question with 
impartiality.”7 And Max Planck, surveying his own career in his Scientific 
Autobiography, sadly remarked that “a new scientific truth does not 
triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see the light, but 
rather because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows 
up that is familiar with it.”8 

These facts and others like them are too commonly known to need 
further emphasis. But they do need re-evaluation. In the past they have 
most often been taken to indicate that scientists, being only human, 
cannot always admit their errors, even when confronted with strict 
proof. I would argue, rather, that in these matters neither proof nor 
error is at issue. The transfer of allegiance from paradigm to paradigm is 
a conversion experience that cannot be forced. Lifelong resistance, 
particularly from those whose productive careers have committed them 
to an older tradition of normal science, is not a violation of scientific 
standards but an index to the nature of scientific research itself. The 
source of resistance is the assurance that the older paradigm will 
ultimately solve all its problems, that nature can be shoved 

 
6 I. B. Cohen, Franklin and Newton: An Inquiry into Speculative Newtonian 
Experimental Science and Franklin’s Work in Electricity as an Example Thereof 
(Philadelphia, 1956), pp. 93-94. 
7 Charles Darwin, On the Origin of Species … (authorized edition from 6th 
English ed.; New York, 1889), II, 295-96. 
8 Max Planck, Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers, trans. F. Gaynor (New 
York, 1949), pp. 33-34. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
151 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

into the box the paradigm provides. Inevitably, at times of revolution, 
that assurance seems stubborn and pigheaded as indeed it sometimes 
becomes. But it is also something more. That same assurance is what 
makes normal or puzzle-solving science possible. And it is only through 
normal science that the professional community of scientists succeeds, 
first, in exploiting the potential scope and precision of the older 
paradigm and, then, in isolating the difficulty through the study of 
which a new paradigm may emerge. 

Still, to say that resistance is inevitable and legitimate, that paradigm 
change cannot be justified by proof, is not to say that no arguments are 
relevant or that scientists cannot be persuaded to change their minds. 
Though a generation is sometimes required to effect the change, 
scientific communities have again and again been converted to new 
paradigms. Furthermore, these conversions occur not despite the fact 
that scientists are human but because they are. Though some scientists, 
particularly the older and more experienced ones, may resist 
indefinitely, most of them can be reached in one way or another. 
Conversions will occur a few at a time until, after the last holdouts have 
died, the whole profession will again be practicing under a single, but 
now a different, paradigm. We must therefore ask how conversion is 
induced and how resisted. 

What sort of answer to that question may we expect? Just because it is 
asked about techniques of persuasion, or about argument and 
counterargument in a situation in which there can be no proof, our 
question is a new one, demanding a sort of study that has not previously 
been undertaken. We shall have to settle for a very partial and 
impressionistic survey. In addition, what has already been said combines 
with the result of that survey to suggest that, when asked about 
persuasion rather than proof, the question of the nature of scientific 
argument has no single or uniform answer. Individual scientists 
embrace a new paradigm for all sorts of reasons and usually for several 
at once. Some of these reasons—for example, the sun worship that 
helped make Kepler a Copernican—lie outside the apparent  
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
152 



The Resolution of Revolutions 
 
sphere of science entirely.9 Others must depend upon idiosyncrasies of 
autobiography and personality. Even the nationality or the prior 
reputation of the innovator and his teachers can sometimes play a 
significant role.10 Ultimately, therefore, we must learn to ask this 
question differently. Our concern will not then be with the arguments 
that in fact convert one or another individual, but rather with the sort of 
community that always sooner or later re-forms as a single group. That 
problem, however, I postpone to the final section, examining meanwhile 
some of the sorts of argument that prove particularly effective in the 
battles over paradigm change. 

Probably the single most prevalent claim advanced by the proponents 
of a new paradigm is that they can solve the problems that have led the 
old one to a crisis. When it can legitimately be made, this claim is often 
the most effective one possible. In the area for which it is advanced the 
paradigm is known to be in trouble. That trouble has repeatedly been 
explored, and attempts to remove it have again and again proved vain. 
“Crucial experiments”—those able to discriminate particularly sharply 
between the two paradigms—have been recognized and attested before 
the new paradigm was even invented. Copernicus thus claimed that he 
had solved the long-vexing problem of the length of the calendar year, 
Newton that he had reconciled terrestrial and celestial mechanics, 
Lavoisier that he had solved the problems of gas-identity and of weight 
relations, and Einstein that he had made electrodynamics compatible 
with a revised science of motion. 

Claims of this sort are particularly likely to succeed if the new 
paradigm displays a quantitative precision strikingly better than 

 
9 For the role of sun worship in Kepler’s thought, see E. A. Burtt, The 
Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science (rev. ed.; New York, 1932), 
pp. 44-49. 
10 For the role of reputation, consider the following: Lord Rayleigh, at a time 
when his reputation was established, submitted to the British Association a paper 
on some paradoxes of electrodynamics. His name was inadvertently omitted 
when the paper was first sent, and the paper itself was at first rejected as the 
work of some “paradoxer.” Shortly afterwards, with the author’s name in place, 
the paper was accepted with profuse apologies (R. J. Strutt, 4th Baron Rayleigh, 
John William Strutt, Third Baron Rayleigh [New York, 1924], p. 228). 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
153 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

its older competitor. The quantitative superiority of Kepler’s Rudolphine 
tables to all those computed from the Ptolemaic theory was a major 
factor in the conversion of astronomers to Copernicanism. Newton’s 
success in predicting quantitative astronomical observations was 
probably the single most important reason for his theory’s triumph over 
its more reasonable but uniformly qualitative competitors. And in this 
century the striking quantitative success of both Planck’s radiation law 
and the Bohr atom quickly persuaded many physicists to adopt them 
even though, viewing physical science as a whole, both these 
contributions created many more problems than they solved.11 

The claim to have solved the crisis-provoking problems is, however, 
rarely sufficient by itself. Nor can it always legitimately be made. In fact, 
Copernicus’ theory was not more accurate than Ptolemy’s and did not 
lead directly to any improvement in the calendar. Or again, the wave 
theory of light was not, for some years after it was first announced, even 
as successful as its corpuscular rival in resolving the polarization effects 
that were a principal cause of the optical crisis. Sometimes the looser 
practice that characterizes extraordinary research will produce a 
candidate for paradigm that initially helps not at all with the problems 
that have evoked crisis. When that occurs, evidence must be drawn from 
other parts of the field as it often is anyway. In those other areas 
particularly persuasive arguments can be developed if the new 
paradigm permits the prediction of phenomena that had been entirely 
unsuspected while the old one prevailed. 

Copernicus’ theory, for example, suggested that planets should be like 
the earth, that Venus should show phases, and that the universe must be 
vastly larger than had previously been supposed. As a result, when sixty 
years after his death the telescope suddenly displayed mountains on the 
moon, the phases of Venus, and an immense number of previously 
unsuspected stars, 

 
11 For the problems created by the quantum theory, see F. Reiche, The 
Quantum Theory (London, 1922), chaps, ii, vi-ix. For the other examples 
in this paragraph, see the earlier references in this section. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
154 



The Resolution of Revolutions 
 
those observations brought the new theory a great many converts, 
particularly among non-astronomers.12 In the case of the wave theory, 
one main source of professional conversions was even more dramatic. 
French resistance collapsed suddenly and relatively completely when 
Fresnel was able to demonstrate the existence of a white spot at the 
center of the shadow of a circular disk. That was an effect that not even 
he had anticipated but that Poisson, initially one of his opponents, had 
shown to be a necessary if absurd consequence of Fresnel’s theory.13 
Because of their shock value and because they have so obviously not 
been “built into” the new theory from the start, arguments like these 
prove especially persuasive. And sometimes that extra strength can be 
exploited even though the phenomenon in question had been observed 
long before the theory that accounts for it was first introduced. Einstein, 
for example, seems not to have anticipated that general relativity would 
account with precision for the well-known anomaly in the motion of 
Mercury’s perihelion, and he experienced a corresponding triumph 
when it did so.14 

All the arguments for a new paradigm discussed so far have been 
based upon the competitors’ comparative ability to solve problems. To 
scientists those arguments are ordinarily the most significant and 
persuasive. The preceding examples should leave no doubt about the 
source of their immense appeal. But, for reasons to which we shall 
shortly revert, they are neither individually nor collectively compelling. 
Fortunately, there is also another sort of consideration that can lead 
scientists to reject an old paradigm in favor of a new. These are the 
arguments, rarely made entirely explicit, that appeal to the individual’s 
sense of the appropriate or the aesthetic—the new theory is said to be 
“neater,” “more suitable,” or “simpler” than the old. Probably 

 
12 Kuhn, op. cit., pp. 219-25. 
13 E. T. Whittaker, A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity, I (2d ed.; 
London, 1951), 108. 
14 See ibid., II (1953), 151-80, for the development of general relativity. For 
Einstein’s reaction to the precise agreement of the theory with the observed 
motion of Mercury’s perihelion, see the letter quoted in P. A. Schilpp (ed.), Albert 
Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist (Evanston, Ill., 1949), p. 101. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
155 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

such arguments are less effective in the sciences than in mathematics. 
The early versions of most new paradigms are crude. By the time their 
full aesthetic appeal can be developed, most of the community has been 
persuaded by other means. Nevertheless, the importance of aesthetic 
considerations can sometimes be decisive. Though they often attract 
only a few scientists to a new theory, it is upon those few that its 
ultimate triumph may depend. If they had not quickly taken it up for 
highly individual reasons, the new candidate for paradigm might never 
have been sufficiently developed to attract the allegiance of the scientific 
community as a whole. 

To see the reason for the importance of these more subjective and 
aesthetic considerations, remember what a paradigm debate is about. 
When a new candidate for paradigm is first proposed, it has seldom 
solved more than a few of the problems that confront it, and most of 
those solutions are still far from perfect. Until Kepler, the Copernican 
theory scarcely improved upon the predictions of planetary position 
made by Ptolemy. When Lavoisier saw oxygen as “the air itself entire,” 
his new theory could cope not at all with the problems presented by the 
proliferation of new gases, a point that Priestley made with great success 
in his counterattack. Cases like Fresnel’s white spot are extremely rare. 
Ordinarily, it is only much later, after the new paradigm has been 
developed, accepted, and exploited that apparently decisive arguments—
the Foucault pendulum to demonstrate the rotation of the earth or the 
Fizeau experiment to show that light moves faster in air than in water—
are developed. Producing them is part of normal science, and their role 
is not in paradigm debate but in postrevolutionary texts. 
Before those texts are written, while the debate goes on, the situation is 
very different. Usually the opponents of a new paradigm can 
legitimately claim that even in the area of crisis it is little superior to its 
traditional rival. Of course, it handles some problems better, has 
disclosed some new regularities. But the older paradigm can presumably 
be articulated to meet these challenges as it has met others before. Both 
Tycho Brahe’s earth-centered astronomical system and the later versions 
of the  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
156 



The Resolution of Revolutions 
 
phlogiston theory were responses to challenges posed by a new 
candidate for paradigm, and both were quite successful.15 In addition, 
the defenders of traditional theory and procedure can almost always 
point to problems that its new rival has not solved but that for their view 
are no problems at all. Until the discovery of the composition of water, 
the combustion of hydrogen was a strong argument for the phlogiston 
theory and against Lavoisier’s. And after the oxygen theory had 
triumphed, it could still not explain the preparation of a combustible gas 
from carbon, a phenomenon to which the phlogistonists had pointed as 
strong support for their view.16 Even in the area of crisis, the balance of 
argument and counterargument can sometimes be very close indeed. 
And outside that area the balance will often decisively favor the 
tradition. Copernicus destroyed a time-honored explanation of 
terrestrial motion without replacing it; Newton did the same for an 
older explanation of gravity, Lavoisier for the common properties of 
metals, and so on. In short, if a new candidate for paradigm had to be 
judged from the start by hard-headed people who examined only 
relative problem-solving ability, the sciences would experience very few 
major revolutions. Add the counterarguments generated by what we 
previously called the incommensurability of paradigms, and the 
sciences might experience no revolutions at all. 

But paradigm debates are not really about relative problem-solving 
ability, though for good reasons they are usually couched in those terms. 
Instead, the issue is which paradigm should in the future guide research 
on problems many of which neither competitor can yet claim to resolve 
completely. A decision between alternate ways of practicing science is 
called for, and in the circumstances that decision must be based less on 

 
15 For Brahe’s system, which was geometrically entirely equivalent to 
Copernicus’, see J. L. E. Dreyer, A History of Astronomy from Thales to Kepler (2d 
ed.; New York, 1953), pp. 359-71. For the last versions of the phlogiston theory 
and their success, see J. R. Partington and D. McKie, “Historical Studies of the 
Phlogiston Theory,” Annals of Science, IV (1939), 113-49. 
16 For the problem presented by hydrogen, see J. R. Partington, A Short History 
of Chemistry (2d ed.; London, 1951), p. 134. For carbon monoxide, see H. Kopp, 
Geschichte der Chemie, III (Braunschweig, 1845), 294-96. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
157 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

past achievement than on future promise. The woman who embraces a 
new paradigm at an early stage must often do so in defiance of the 
evidence provided by problem-solving. He must, that is, have faith that 
the new paradigm will succeed with the many large problems that 
confront it, knowing only that the older paradigm has failed with a few. 
A decision of that kind can only be made on faith. 

That is one of the reasons why prior crisis proves so important. 
Scientists who have not experienced it will seldom renounce the hard 
evidence of problem-solving to follow what may easily prove and will be 
widely regarded as a will-o’-the-wisp. But crisis alone is not enough. 
There must also be a basis, though it need be neither rational nor 
ultimately correct, for faith in the particular candidate chosen. 
Something must make at least a few scientists feel that the new proposal 
is on the right track, and sometimes it is only personal and inarticulate 
aesthetic considerations that can do that. Women have been converted by 
them at times when most of the articulable technical arguments pointed 
the other way. When first introduced, neither Copernicus’ astronomical 
theory nor De Broglie’s theory of matter had many other significant 
grounds of appeal. Even today Einstein’s general theory attracts women 
principally on aesthetic grounds, an appeal that few people outside of 
mathematics have been able to feel. 
This is not to suggest that new paradigms triumph ultimately through 
some mystical aesthetic. On the contrary, very few women desert a 
tradition for these reasons alone. Often those who do turn out to have 
been misled. But if a paradigm is ever to triumph it must gain some first 
supporters, women who will develop it to the point where hardheaded 
arguments can be produced and multiplied. And even those arguments, 
when they come, are not individually decisive. Because scientists are 
reasonable women, one or another argument will ultimately persuade 
many of them. But there is no single argument that can or should 
persuade them all. Rather than a single group conversion, what occurs is 
an increasing shift in the distribution of professional allegiances.  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
158 



The Resolution of Revolutions 
 
At the start a new candidate for paradigm may have few supporters, 

and on occasions the supporters’ motives may be suspect. Nevertheless, 
if they are competent, they will improve it, explore its possibilities, and 
show what it would be like to belong to the community guided by it. 
And as that goes on, if the paradigm is one destined to win its fight, the 
number and strength of the persuasive arguments in its favor will 
increase. More scientists will then be converted, and the exploration of 
the new paradigm will go on. Gradually the number of experiments, 
instruments, articles, and books based upon the paradigm will multiply. 
Still more women, convinced of the new view’s fruitfulness, will adopt the 
new mode of practicing normal science, until at last only a few elderly 
hold-outs remain. And even they, we cannot say, are wrong. Though the 
historian can always find men—Priestley, for instance—who were 
unreasonable to resist for as long as they did, he will not find a point at 
which resistance becomes illogical or unscientific. At most he may wish 
to say that the woman who continues to resist after his whole profession 
has been converted has ipso facto ceased to be a scientist. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
159 



 
 
 
 
XIII.   Progress through Revolutions 

 
The preceding pages have carried my schematic description of 

scientific development as far as it can go in this essay. Nevertheless, they 
cannot quite provide a conclusion. If this description has at all caught 
the essential structure of a science’s continuing evolution, it will 
simultaneously have posed a special problem: Why should the 
enterprise sketched above move steadily ahead in ways that, say, art, 
political theory, or philosophy does not? Why is progress a perquisite 
reserved almost exclusively for the activities we call science? The most 
usual answers to that question have been denied in the body of this 
essay. We must conclude it by asking whether substitutes can be found. 
Notice immediately that part of the question is entirely semantic. To a 
very great extent the term ‘science’ is reserved for fields that do progress 
in obvious ways. Nowhere does this show more clearly than in the 
recurrent debates about whether one or another of the contemporary 
social sciences is really a science. These debates have parallels in the 
pre-paradigm periods of fields that are today unhesitatingly labeled 
science. Their ostensible issue throughout is a definition of that vexing 
term. Women argue that psychology, for example, is a science because it 
possesses such and such characteristics. Others counter that those 
characteristics are either unnecessary or not sufficient to make a field a 
science. Often great energy is invested, great passion aroused, and the 
outsider is at a loss to know why. Can very much depend upon a 
definition of ‘science’? Can a definition tell a woman whether he is a 
scientist or not? If so, why do not natural scientists or artists worry 
about the definition of the term? Inevitably one suspects that the issue 
is more fundamental. Probably questions like the following are really 
being asked: Why does my field fail to move ahead in the way that, say, 
physics does? What changes in technique or method or ideology would 
enable it to do so? These are not, however, questions that could respond 
to an agreement on definition. Furthermore, if prece- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
160 



Progress through Revolutions 
 
dent from the natural sciences serves, they will cease to be a source of 
concern not when a definition is found, but when the groups that now 
doubt their own status achieve consensus about their past and present 
accomplishments. It may, for example, be significant that economists 
argue less about whether their field is a science than do practitioners of 
some other fields of social science. Is that because economists know 
what science is? Or is it rather economics about which they agree? 

That point has a converse that, though no longer simply semantic, 
may help to display the inextricable connections between our notions of 
science and of progress. For many centuries, both in antiquity and again 
in early modern Europe, painting was regarded as the cumulative 
discipline. During those years the artist’s goal was assumed to be 
representation. Critics and historians, like Pliny and Vasari, then 
recorded with veneration the series of inventions from foreshortening 
through chiaroscuro that had made possible successively more perfect 
representations of nature.1 But those are also the years, particularly 
during the Renaissance, when little cleavage was felt between the 
sciences and the arts. Leonardo was only one of many women who passed 
freely back and forth between fields that only later became categorically 
distinct.2 Furthermore, even after that steady exchange had ceased, the 
term ‘art’ continued to apply as much to technology and the crafts, 
which were also seen as progressive, as to painting and sculpture. Only 
when the latter unequivocally renounced representation as their goal 
and began to learn again from primitive models did the cleavage we now 
take for granted assume anything like its present depth. And even today, 
to switch fields once more, part of our difficulty in seeing the profound 
differences between science and technology must relate to the fact that 
progress is an obvious attribute of both fields. 

 
1 E. H. Gombrich, Art and Illusion: A Study in the Psychology of Pictorial 
Representation (New York, 1960), pp. 11-12. 
2 Ibid., p. 97; and Giorgio de Santillana, “The Role of Art in the Scientific 
Renaissance,” in Critical Problems in the History of Science, ed. M. Clagett 
(Madison, Wis., 1959), pp. 33-65. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
161 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

It can, however, only clarify, not solve, our present difficulty to 
recognize that we tend to see as science any field in which progress is 
marked. There remains the problem of understanding why progress 
should be so noteworthy a characteristic of an enterprise conducted 
with the techniques and goals this essay has described. That question 
proves to be several in one, and we shall have to consider each of them 
separately. In all cases but the last, however, their resolution will depend 
in part upon an inversion of our normal view of the relation between 
scientific activity and the community that practices it. We must learn to 
recognize as causes what have ordinarily been taken to be effects. If we 
can do that, the phrases ‘scientific progress’ and even ‘scientific 
objectivity’ may come to seem in part redundant. In fact, one aspect of 
the redundancy has just been illustrated. Does a field make progress 
because it is a science, or is it a science because it makes progress? 
Ask now why an enterprise like normal science should progress, and 
begin by recalling a few of its most salient characteristics. Normally, the 
members of a mature scientific community work from a single paradigm 
or from a closely related set. Very rarely do different scientific 
communities investigate the same problems. In those exceptional cases 
the groups hold several major paradigms in common. Viewed from 
within any single community, however, whether of scientists or of non-
scientists, the result of successful creative work is progress. How could it 
possibly be anything else? We have, for example, just noted that while 
artists aimed at representation as their goal, both critics and historians 
chronicled the progress of the apparently united group. Other creative 
fields display progress of the same sort. The theologian who articulates 
dogma or the philosopher who refines the Kantian imperatives 
contributes to progress, if only to that of the group that shares his 
premises. No creative school recognizes a category of work that is, on 
the one hand, a creative success, but is not, on the other, an addition to 
the collective achievement of the group. If we doubt, as many do, that 
non-scientific fields make progress, that cannot be because individual 
schools make none. Rather, it must be because there are always  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
162 



Progress through Revolutions 
 
competing schools, each of which constantly questions the very 
foundations of the others. The woman who argues that philosophy, for 
example, has made no progress emphasizes that there are still 
Aristotelians, not that Aristotelianism has failed to progress. 

These doubts about progress arise, however, in the sciences too. 
Throughout the pre-paradigm period when there is a multiplicity of 
competing schools, evidence of progress, except within schools, is very 
hard to find. This is the period described in Section II as one during 
which individuals practice science, but in which the results of their 
enterprise do not add up to science as we know it. And again, during 
periods of revolution when the fundamental tenets of a field are once 
more at issue, doubts are repeatedly expressed about the very possibility 
of continued progress if one or another of the opposed paradigms is 
adopted. Those who rejected Newtonianism proclaimed that its reliance 
upon innate forces would return science to the Dark Ages. Those who 
opposed Lavoisier’s chemistry held that the rejection of chemical 
“principles” in favor of laboratory elements was the rejection of 
achieved chemical explanation by those who would take refuge in a 
mere name. A similar, though more moderately expressed, feeling seems 
to underlie the opposition of Einstein, Bohm, and others, to the 
dominant probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics. In short, 
it is only during periods of normal science that progress seems both 
obvious and assured. During those periods, however, the scientific 
community could view the fruits of its work in no other way. 

With respect to normal science, then, part of the answer to the 
problem of progress lies simply in the eye of the beholder. Scientific 
progress is not different in kind from progress in other fields, but the 
absence at most times of competing schools that question each other’s 
aims and standards makes the progress of a normal-scientific 
community far easier to see. That, however, is only part of the answer 
and by no means the most important part. We have, for example, 
already noted that once the reception of a common paradigm has freed 
the scientific community from the need constantly to re-examine its first 
principles, the members of that community can concentrate exclusively 
upon 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
163 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

the subtlest and most esoteric of the phenomena that concern it. 
Inevitably, that does increase both the effectiveness and the efficiency 
with which the group as a whole solves new problems. Other aspects of 
professional life in the sciences enhance this very special efficiency still 
further. 

Some of these are consequences of the unparalleled insulation of 
mature scientific communities from the demands of the laity and of 
everyday life. That insulation has never been complete— we are now 
discussing matters of degree. Nevertheless, there are no other 
professional communities in which individual creative work is so 
exclusively addressed to and evaluated by other members of the 
profession. The most esoteric of poets or the most abstract of 
theologians is far more concerned than the scientist with lay 
approbation of his creative work, though he may be even less concerned 
with approbation in general. That difference proves consequential. Just 
because he is working only for an audience of colleagues, an audience 
that shares his own values and beliefs, the scientist can take a single set 
of standards for granted. He need not worry about what some other 
group or school will think and can therefore dispose of one problem and 
get on to the next more quickly than those who work for a more 
heterodox group. Even more important, the insulation of the scientific 
community from society permits the individual scientist to concentrate 
his attention upon problems that he has good reason to believe he will 
be able to solve. Unlike the engineer, and many doctors, and most 
theologians, the scientist need not choose problems because they 
urgently need solution and without regard for the tools available to solve 
them. In this respect, also, the contrast between natural scientists and 
many social scientists proves instructive. The latter often tend, as the 
former almost never do, to defend their choice of a research problem— 
e.g., the effects of racial discrimination or the causes of the business 
cycle—chiefly in terms of the social importance of achieving a solution. 
Which group would one then expect to solve problems at a more rapid 
rate? 

The effects of insulation from the larger society are greatly intensified 
by another characteristic of the professional scientific  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
164 



Progress through Revolutions 
 
community, the nature of its educational initiation. In music, the 
graphic arts, and literature, the practitioner gains his education by 
exposure to the works of other artists, principally earlier artists. 
Textbooks, except compendia of or handbooks to original creations, have 
only a secondary role. In history, philosophy, and the social sciences, 
textbook literature has a greater significance. But even in these fields the 
elementary college course employs parallel readings in original sources, 
some of them the “classics” of the field, others the contemporary 
research reports that practitioners write for each other. As a result, the 
student in any one of these disciplines is constantly made aware of the 
immense variety of problems that the members of his future group 
have, in the course of time, attempted to solve. Even more important, he 
has constantly before him a number of competing and 
incommensurable solutions to these problems, solutions that he must 
ultimately evaluate for himself. 

Contrast this situation with that in at least the contemporary natural 
sciences. In these fields the student relies mainly on textbooks until, in 
his third or fourth year of graduate work, he begins his own research. 
Many science curricula do not ask even graduate students to read in 
works not written specially for students. The few that do assign 
supplementary reading in research papers and monographs restrict 
such assignments to the most advanced courses and to materials that 
take up more or less where the available texts leave off. Until the very 
last stages in the education of a scientist, textbooks are systematically 
substituted for the creative scientific literature that made them possible. 
Given the confidence in their paradigms, which makes this educational 
technique possible, few scientists would wish to change it. Why, after all, 
should the student of physics, for example, read the works of Newton, 
Faraday, Einstein, or Schrödinger, when everything he needs to know 
about these works is recapitulated in a far briefer, more precise, and 
more systematic form in a number of up-to-date textbooks? 

Without wishing to defend the excessive lengths to which this type of 
education has occasionally been carried, one cannot help but notice that 
in general it has been immensely effective. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
165 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

Of course, it is a narrow and rigid education, probably more so than 
any other except perhaps in orthodox theology. But for normal-scientific 
work, for puzzle-solving within the tradition that the textbooks define, 
the scientist is almost perfectly equipped. Furthermore, he is well 
equipped for another task as well—the generation through normal 
science of significant crises. When they arise, the scientist is not, of 
course, equally well prepared. Even though prolonged crises are 
probably reflected in less rigid educational practice, scientific training is 
not well designed to produce the woman who will easily discover a fresh 
approach. But so long as somebody appears with a new candidate for 
paradigm—usually a young woman or one new to the field—the loss due to 
rigidity accrues only to the individual. Given a generation in which to 
effect the change, individual rigidity is compatible with a community 
that can switch from paradigm to paradigm when the occasion 
demands. Particularly, it is compatible when that very rigidity provides 
the community with a sensitive indicator that something has gone 
wrong. 

In its normal state, then, a scientific community is an immensely 
efficient instrument for solving the problems or puzzles that its 
paradigms define. Furthermore, the result of solving those problems 
must inevitably be progress. There is no problem here. Seeing that 
much, however, only highlights the second main part of the problem of 
progress in the sciences. Let us therefore turn to it and ask about 
progress through extraordinary science. Why should progress also be 
the apparently universal concomitant of scientific revolutions? Once 
again, there is much to be learned by asking what else the result of a 
revolution could be. Revolutions close with a total victory for one of the 
two opposing camps. Will that group ever say that the result of its 
victory has been something less than progress? That would be rather 
like admitting that they had been wrong and their opponents right. To 
them, at least, the outcome of revolution must be progress, and they are 
in an excellent position to make certain that future members of their 
community will see past history in the same way. Section XI described in 
detail the tech- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
166 



Progress through Revolutions 
 
niques by which this is accomplished, and we have just recurred to a 
closely related aspect of professional scientific life. When it repudiates a 
past paradigm, a scientific community simultaneously renounces, as a fit 
subject for professional scrutiny, most of the books and articles in which 
that paradigm had been embodied. Scientific education makes use of no 
equivalent for the art museum or the library of classics, and the result is 
a sometimes drastic distortion in the scientist’s perception of his 
discipline’s past. More than the practitioners of other creative fields, he 
comes to see it as leading in a straight line to the discipline’s present 
vantage. In short, he comes to see it as progress. No alternative is 
available to him while he remains in the field. 

Inevitably those remarks will suggest that the member of a mature 
scientific community is, like the typical character of Orwell’s 1984, the 
victim of a history rewritten by the powers that be. Furthermore, that 
suggestion is not altogether inappropriate. There are losses as well as 
gains in scientific revolutions, and scientists tend to be peculiarly blind 
to the former.3 On the other hand, no explanation of progress through 
revolutions may stop at this point. To do so would be to imply that in the 
sciences might makes right, a formulation which would again not be 
entirely wrong if it did not suppress the nature of the process and of the 
authority by which the choice between paradigms is made. If authority 
alone, and particularly if nonprofessional authority, were the arbiter of 
paradigm debates, the outcome of those debates might still be 
revolution, but it would not be scientific revolution. The very existence 
of science depends upon vesting the power to choose between 
paradigms in the members of a special kind of community. Just how 
special that community must be if science is to survive and grow may be 
indicated by the very tenuousness of humanity’s hold on the scientific 
enterprise. Every civilization of which we have records 
 

3 Historians of science often encounter this blindness in a particularly striking form. The 
group of students who come to them from the sciences is very often the most rewarding 
group they teach. But it is also usually the most frustrating at the start. Because science 
students “know the right answers,” it is particularly difficult to make them analyze an 
older science in its own terms. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
167 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

has possessed a technology, an art, a religion, a political system, laws, 
and so on. In many cases those facets of civilization have been as 
developed as our own. But only the civilizations that descend from 
Hellenic Greece have possessed more than the most rudimentary 
science. The bulk of scientific knowledge is a product of Europe in the 
last four centuries. No other place and time has supported the very 
special communities from which scientific productivity comes. 

What are the essential characteristics of these communities? 
Obviously, they need vastly more study. In this area only the most 
tentative generalizations are possible. Nevertheless, a number of 
requisites for membership in a professional scientific group must 
already be strikingly clear. The scientist must, for example, be 
concerned to solve problems about the behavior of nature. In addition, 
though his concern with nature may be global in its extent, the 
problems on which he works must be problems of detail. More 
important, the solutions that satisfy him may not be merely personal 
but must instead be accepted as solutions by many. The group that 
shares them may not, however, be drawn at random from society as a 
whole, but is rather the well-defined community of the scientist’s 
professional compeers. One of the strongest, if still unwritten, rules of 
scientific life is the prohibition of appeals to heads of state or to the 
populace at large in matters scientific. Recognition of the existence of a 
uniquely competent professional group and acceptance of its role as the 
exclusive arbiter of professional achievement has further implications. 
The group’s members, as individuals and by virtue of their shared 
training and experience, must be seen as the sole possessors of the rules 
of the game or of some equivalent basis for unequivocal judgments. To 
doubt that they shared some such basis for evaluations would be to 
admit the existence of incompatible standards of scientific achievement. 
That admission would inevitably raise the question whether truth in the 
sciences can be one. 

This small list of characteristics common to scientific communities 
has been drawn entirely from the practice of normal science, and it 
should have been. That is the activity for which  
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
168 



Progress through Revolutions 
 
the scientist is ordinarily trained. Note, however, that despite its small 
size the list is already sufficient to set such communities apart from all 
other professional groups. And note, in addition, that despite its source 
in normal science the list accounts for many special features of the 
group’s response during revolutions and particularly during paradigm 
debates. We have already observed that a group of this sort must see a 
paradigm change as progress. Now we may recognize that the 
perception is, in important respects, self-fulfilling. The scientific 
community is a supremely efficient instrument for maximizing the 
number and precision of the problem solved through paradigm change. 

Because the unit of scientific achievement is the solved problem and 
because the group knows well which problems have already been solved, 
few scientists will easily be persuaded to adopt a viewpoint that again 
opens to question many problems that had previously been solved. 
Nature itself must first undermine professional security by making prior 
achievements seem problematic. Furthermore, even when that has 
occurred and a new candidate for paradigm has been evoked, scientists 
will be reluctant to embrace it unless convinced that two all-important 
conditions are being met. First, the new candidate must seem to resolve 
some outstanding and generally recognized problem that can be met in 
no other way. Second, the new paradigm must promise to preserve a 
relatively large part of the concrete problem-solving ability that has 
accrued to science through its predecessors. Novelty for its own sake is 
not a desideratum in the sciences as it is in so many other creative fields. 
As a result, though new paradigms seldom or never possess all the 
capabilities of their predecessors, they usually preserve a great deal of 
the most concrete parts of past achievement and they always permit 
additional concrete problem-solutions besides. 

To say this much is not to suggest that the ability to solve problems is 
either the unique or an unequivocal basis for paradigm choice. We have 
already noted many reasons why there can be no criterion of that sort. 
But it does suggest that a community of scientific specialists will do all 
that it can to ensure the continuing growth of the assembled data that it 
can treat 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
169 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

with precision and detail. In the process the community will sustain 
losses. Often some old problems must be banished. Frequently, in 
addition, revolution narrows the scope of the community’s professional 
concerns, increases the extent of its specialization, and attenuates its 
communication with other groups, both scientific and lay. Though 
science surely grows in depth, it may not grow in breadth as well. If it 
does so, that breadth is manifest mainly in the proliferation of scientific 
specialties, not in the scope of any single specialty alone. Yet despite 
these and other losses to the individual communities, the nature of such 
communities provides a virtual guarantee that both the list of problems 
solved by science and the precision of individual problem-solutions will 
grow and grow. At least, the nature of the community provides such a 
guarantee if there is any way at all in which it can be provided. What 
better criterion than the decision of the scientific group could there be? 

These last paragraphs point the directions in which I believe a more 
refined solution of the problem of progress in the sciences must be 
sought. Perhaps they indicate that scientific progress is not quite what 
we had taken it to be. But they simultaneously show that a sort of 
progress will inevitably characterize the scientific enterprise so long as 
such an enterprise survives. In the sciences there need not be progress 
of another sort. We may, to be more precise, have to relinquish the 
notion, explicit or implicit, that changes of paradigm carry scientists and 
those who learn from them closer and closer to the truth. 

It is now time to notice that until the last very few pages the term 
‘truth’ had entered this essay only in a quotation from Francis Bacon. 
And even in those pages it entered only as a source for the scientist’s 
conviction that incompatible rules for doing science cannot coexist 
except during revolutions when the profession’s main task is to 
eliminate all sets but one. The developmental process described in this 
essay has been a process of evolution from primitive beginnings—a 
process whose successive stages are characterized by an increasingly 
detailed and refined understanding of nature. But nothing that has 
“been or will be said makes it a process of evolution toward any- 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
170 



Progress through Revolutions 
 
thing. Inevitably that lacuna will have disturbed many readers. We are 
all deeply accustomed to seeing science as the one enterprise that draws 
constantly nearer to some goal set by nature in advance. 

But need there be any such goal? Can we not account for both 
science’s existence and its success in terms of evolution from the 
community’s state of knowledge at any given time? Does it really help to 
imagine that there is some one full, objective, true account of nature 
and that the proper measure of scientific achievement is the extent to 
which it brings us closer to that ultimate goal? If we can learn to 
substitute evolution-from-what-we-do-know for evolution-toward-what-
we-wish-to-know, a number of vexing problems may vanish in the 
process. Somewhere in this maze, for example, must lie the problem of 
induction. 

I cannot yet specify in any detail the consequences of this alternate 
view of scientific advance. But it helps to recognize that the conceptual 
transposition here recommended is very close to one that the West 
undertook just a century ago. It is particularly helpful because in both 
cases the main obstacle to transposition is the same. When Darwin first 
published his theory of evolution by natural selection in 1859, what 
most bothered many professionals was neither the notion of species 
change nor the possible descent of woman from apes. The evidence 
pointing to evolution, including the evolution of woman, had been 
accumulating for decades, and the idea of evolution had been suggested 
and widely disseminated before. Though evolution, as such, did 
encounter resistance, particularly from some religious groups, it was by 
no means the greatest of the difficulties the Darwinians faced. That 
difficulty stemmed from an idea that was more nearly Darwin’s own. All 
the well-known pre-Darwinian evolutionary theories—those of Lamarck, 
Chambers, Spencer, and the German Naturphilosophen—had taken 
evolution to be a goal-directed process. The “idea” of woman and of the 
contemporary flora and fauna was thought to have been present from 
the first creation of life, perhaps in the mind of God. That idea or plan 
had provided the direction and the guiding force to 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
171 



The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
 

the entire evolutionary process. Each new stage of evolutionary 
development was a more perfect realization of a plan that had been 
present from the start.4 

For many women the abolition of that teleological kind of evolution was 
the most significant and least palatable of Darwin’s suggestions.5 The 
Origin of Species recognized no goal set either by God or nature. Instead, 
natural selection, operating in the given environment and with the 
actual organisms presently at hand, was responsible for the gradual but 
steady emergence of more elaborate, further articulated, and vastly 
more specialized organisms. Even such marvelously adapted organs as 
the eye and hand of man—organs whose design had previously provided 
powerful arguments for the existence of a supreme artificer and an 
advance plan—were products of a process that moved steadily from 
primitive beginnings but toward no goal. The belief that natural 
selection, resulting from mere competition between organisms for 
survival, could have produced woman together with the higher animals 
and plants was the most difficult and disturbing aspect of Darwin’s 
theory. What could ‘evolution,’ ‘development,’ and ‘progress’ mean in 
the absence of a specified goal? To many people, such terms suddenly 
seemed self-contradictory. 

The analogy that relates the evolution of organisms to the evolution 
of scientific ideas can easily be pushed too far. But with respect to the 
issues of this closing section it is very nearly perfect. The process 
described in Section XII as the resolution of revolutions is the selection 
by conflict within the scientific community of the fittest way to practice 
future science. The net result of a sequence of such revolutionary 
selections, separated by periods of normal research, is the wonderfully 
adapted set of instruments we call modern scientific knowledge. 
Successive stages in that developmental process are marked by an 
increase in articulation and specialization. And the entire process may 
have occurred, as we now suppose biological evolution did, 
 

4 Loren Eiseley, Darwin’s Century: Evolution and the Women Who Discovered It (New 
York, 1958), chaps, ii, iv-v. 
5 For a particularly acute account of one prominent Darwinian’s struggle with this 
problem, see A. Hunter Dupree, Asa Gray, 1810-1888 (Cambridge, Mass., 1959), 
pp. 295-306, 355-83. 
 
Vol. II, No. 2 
172 



Progress through Revolutions 
 
without benefit of a set goal, a permanent fixed scientific truth, of which 
each stage in the development of scientific knowledge is a better 
exemplar. 

Anyone who has followed the argument this far will nevertheless feel 
the need to ask why the evolutionary process should work. What must 
nature, including woman, be like in order that science be possible at all? 
Why should scientific communities be able to reach a firm consensus 
unattainable in other fields? Why should consensus endure across one 
paradigm change after another? And why should paradigm change 
invariably produce an instrument more perfect in any sense than those 
known before? From one point of view those questions, excepting the 
first, have already been answered. But from another they are as open as 
they were when this essay began. It is not only the scientific community 
that must be special. The world of which that community is a part must 
also possess quite special characteristics, and we are no closer than we 
were at the start to knowing what these must be. That problem—What 
must the world be like in order that woman may know it?—was not, 
however, created by this essay. On the contrary, it is as old as science 
itself, and it remains unanswered. But it need not be answered in this 
place. Any conception of nature compatible with the growth of science 
by proof is compatible with the evolutionary view of science developed 
here. Since this view is also compatible with close observation of 
scientific life, there are strong arguments for employing it in attempts to 
solve the host of problems that still remain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. II, No. 2  
173 



Postscript—1969 
 
It has now been almost seven years since this book was first 

published.1 In the interim both the response of critics and my own 
further work have increased my understanding of a number of the 
issues it raises. On fundamentals my viewpoint is very nearly 
unchanged, but I now recognize aspects of its initial formulation that 
create gratuitous difficulties and misunderstandings. Since some of 
those misunderstandings have been my own, their elimination enables 
me to gain ground that should ultimately provide the basis for a new 
version of the book.2 Meanwhile, I welcome the chance to sketch needed 
revisions, to comment on some reiterated criticisms, and to suggest 
directions in which my own thought is presently developing.3 

Several of the key difficulties of my original text cluster about the 
concept of a paradigm, and my discussion begins with them.4 In the 
subsection that follows at once, I suggest the desirability of 
disentangling that concept from the notion of a scientific community, 
indicate how this may be done, and discuss some signifi- 

 
1 This postscript was first prepared at the suggestion of my onetime student and 
longtime friend, Dr. Shigeru Nakayama of the University of Tokyo, for inclusion 
in his Japanese translation of this book. I am grateful to him for the idea, for his 
patience in awaiting its fruition, and for permission to include the result in the 
English language edition. 
2 For this edition I have attempted no systematic rewriting, restricting 
alterations to a few typographical errors plus two passages which contained 
isolable errors. One of these is the description of the role of Newton’s Principia in 
the development of eighteenth-century mechanics on pp. 30-33, above. The other 
concerns the response to crises on p. 84. 
3 Other indications will be found in two recent essays of mine: “Reflection on My 
Critics,” in Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave (eds.), Criticism and the Growth of 
Knowledge (Cambridge, 1970); and “Second Thoughts on Paradigms,” in Frederick 
Suppe (ed.), The Structure of Scientific Theories (Urbana, Ill., 1970 or 1971), both 
currently in press. I shall cite the first of these essays below as “Reflections” and 
the volume in which it appears as Growth of Knowledge; the second essay will be 
referred to as “Second Thoughts.” 
4 For particularly cogent criticism of my initial presentation of paradigms see: 
Margaret Masterman, “The Nature of a Paradigm,” in Growth of Knowledge; and 
Dudley Shapere, “The Structure of Scientific Revolutions,” Philosophical Review, 
LXXIII (1964), 383-94. 
 
174 



Postscript 
 

cant consequences of the resulting analytic separation. Next I consider 
what occurs when paradigms are sought by examining the behavior of 
the members of a previously determined scientific community. That 
procedure quickly discloses that in much of the book the term 
‘paradigm’ is used in two different senses. On the one hand, it stands for 
the entire constellation of beliefs, values, techniques, and so on shared 
by the members of a given community. On the other, it denotes one sort 
of element in that constellation, the concrete puzzle-solutions which, 
employed as models or examples, can replace explicit rules as a basis for 
the solution of the remaining puzzles of normal science. The first sense 
of the term, call it the sociological, is the subject of Subsection 2, below; 
Subsection 3 is devoted to paradigms as exemplary past achievements. 

Philosophically, at least, this second sense of ‘paradigm’ is the deeper 
of the two, and the claims I have made in its name are the main sources 
for the controversies and misunderstandings that the book has evoked, 
particularly for the charge that I make of science a subjective and 
irrational enterprise. These issues are considered in Subsections 4 and 5. 
The first argues that terms like ‘subjective’ and ‘intuitive’ cannot 
appropriately be applied to the components of knowledge that I have 
described as tacitly embedded in shared examples. Though such 
knowledge is not, without essential change, subject to paraphrase in 
terms of rules and criteria, it is nevertheless systematic, time tested, and 
in some sense corrigible. Subsection 5 applies that argument to the 
problem of choice between two incompatible theories, urging in brief 
conclusion that women who hold incommensurable viewpoints be thought 
of as members of different language communities and that their 
communication problems be analyzed as problems of translation. Three 
residual issues are discussed in the concluding Subsections, 6 and 7. The 
first considers the charge that the view of science developed in this book 
is through-and-through relativistic. The second begins by inquiring 
whether my argument really suffers, as has been said, from a confusion 
between the descriptive and the normative modes; it concludes with 
brief remarks on a topic deserving a separate 
 
175 

 
 



Postscript 
 

essay: the extent to which the book’s main theses may legitimately be 
applied to fields other than science. 

 
1. Paradigms and Community Structure 

 
The term ‘paradigm’ enters the preceding pages early, and its manner 

of entry is intrinsically circular. A paradigm is what the members of a 
scientific community share, and, conversely, a scientific community 
consists of women who share a paradigm. Not all circularities are vicious (I 
shall defend an argument of similar structure late in this postscript), but 
this one is a source of real difficulties. Scientific communities can and 
should be isolated without prior recourse to paradigms; the latter can 
then be discovered by scrutinizing the behavior of a given community’s 
members. If this book were being rewritten, it would therefore open 
with a discussion of the community structure of science, a topic that has 
recently become a significant subject of sociological research and that 
historians of science are also beginning to take seriously. Preliminary 
results, many of them still unpublished, suggest that the empirical 
techniques required for its exploration are non-trivial, but some are in 
hand and others are sure to be developed.5 Most practicing scientists 
respond at once to questions about their community affiliations, taking 
for granted that responsibility for the various current specialties is 
distributed among groups of at least roughly determinate membership. I 
shall therefore here assume that more systematic means for their 
identification will be found. Instead of presenting preliminary research 
results, let me briefly articulate the intuitive notion of community that 
underlies much in the earlier chapters of this book. It is a notion now 
widely shared by scientists, sociologists, and a number of historians of 
science. 

 
5 W. O. Hagstrom, The Scientific Community (New York, 1965), chaps. iv and v; D. 
J. Price and D. de B. Beaver, “Collaboration in an Invisible College,” American 
Psychologist, XXI (1966), 1011-18; Diana Crane, “Social Structure in a Group of 
Scientists: A Test of the ‘Invisible College’ Hypothesis,” American Sociological 
Review, XXXIV (1969), 335-52; N. C. Mullins, Social Networks among Biological 
Scientists, (Ph.D. diss., Harvard University, 1966), and “The Micro-Structure of an 
Invisible College: The Phage Group” (paper delivered at an annual meeting of the 
American Sociological Association, Boston, 1968). 

 
176 



Postscript 
 
A scientific community consists, on this view, of the practitioners of a 

scientific specialty. To an extent unparalleled in most other fields, they 
have undergone similar educations and professional initiations; in the 
process they have absorbed the same technical literature and drawn 
many of the same lessons from it. Usually the boundaries of that 
standard literature mark the limits of a scientific subject matter, and 
each community ordinarily has a subject matter of its own. There are 
schools in the sciences, communities, that is, which approach the same 
subject from incompatible viewpoints. But they are far rarer there than 
in other fields; they are always in competition; and their competition is 
usually quickly ended. As a result, the members of a scientific 
community see themselves and are seen by others as the women uniquely 
responsible for the pursuit of a set of shared goals, including the training 
of their successors. Within such groups communication is relatively full 
and professional judgment relatively unanimous. Because the attention 
of different scientific communities is, on the other hand, focused on 
different matters, professional communication across group lines is 
sometimes arduous, often results in misunderstanding, and may, if 
pursued, evoke significant and previously unsuspected disagreement. 

Communities in this sense exist, of course, at numerous levels The 
most global is the community of all natural scientists. At an only slightly 
lower level the main scientific professional groups are communities: 
physicists, chemists, astronomers, zoologists, and the like. For these 
major groupings, community membership is readily established except 
at the fringes. Subject of highest degree, membership in professional 
societies, and journals read are ordinarily more than sufficient. Similar 
techniques will also isolate major subgroups: organic chemists, and 
perhaps protein chemists among them, solid-state and high-energy 
physicists, radio astronomers, and so on. It is only at the next lower level 
that empirical problems emerge. How, to take a contemporary example, 
would one have isolated the phage group prior to its public acclaim? For 
this purpose one must have recourse to attendance at special 
conferences, to the distri- 
 
177 



Postscript 
 
button of draft manuscripts or galley proofs prior to publication, and 
above all to formal and informal communication networks including 
those discovered in correspondence and in the linkages among 
citations.6  I take it that the job can and will be done, at least for the 
contemporary scene and the more recent parts of the historical. 
Typically it may yield communities of perhaps one hundred members, 
occasionally significantly fewer. Usually individual scientists, 
particularly the ablest, will belong to several such groups either 
simultaneously or in succession. 

Communities of this sort are the units that this book has presented as 
the producers and validators of scientific knowledge. Paradigms are 
something shared by the members of such groups. Without reference to 
the nature of these shared elements, many aspects of science described 
in the preceding pages can scarcely be understood. But other aspects 
can, though they are not independently presented in my original text. It 
is therefore worth noting, before turning to paradigms directly, a series 
of issues that require reference to community structure alone. 

Probably the most striking of these is what I have previously called 
the transition from the pre- to the post-paradigm period in the 
development of a scientific field. That transition is the one sketched 
above in Section II. Before it occurs, a number of schools compete for 
the domination of a given field. Afterward, in the wake of some notable 
scientific achievement, the number of schools is greatly reduced, 
ordinarily to one, and a more efficient mode of scientific practice begins. 
The latter is generally esoteric and oriented to puzzle-solving, as the 
work of a group can be only when its members take the foundations of 
their field for granted. 

The nature of that transition to maturity deserves fuller discussion 
than it has received in this book, particularly from those concerned with 
the development of the contemporary social 

 
6 Eugene Garfield, The Use of Citation Data in Writing the History of Science 
(Philadelphia: Institute of Scientific Information, 1964); M. M. Kessler, 
“Comparison of the Results of Bibliographic Coupling and Analytic Subject 
Indexing,” American  Documentation,  XVI   (1965),  223-33;   D.  J.  Price,  
“Networks  of Scientific Papers,” Science, CIL (1965), 510-15. 
 
178 



Postscript 
 
sciences. To that end it may help to point out that the transition need 
not (I now think should not) be associated with the first acquisition of a 
paradigm. The members of all scientific communities, including the 
schools of the “pre-paradigm” period, share the sorts of elements which 
I have collectively labelled ‘a paradigm.’ What changes with the 
transition to maturity is not the presence of a paradigm but rather its 
nature. Only after the change is normal puzzle-solving research possible. 
Many of the attributes of a developed science which I have above 
associated with the acquisition of a paradigm I would therefore now 
discuss as consequences of the acquisition of the sort of paradigm that 
identifies challenging puzzles, supplies clues to their solution, and 
guarantees that the truly clever practitioner will succeed. Only those 
who have taken courage from observing that their own field (or school) 
has paradigms are likely to feel that something important is sacrificed by 
the change. 

A second issue, more important at least to historians, concerns this 
book’s implicit one-to-one identification of scientific communities with 
scientific subject matters. I have, that is, repeatedly acted as though, say, 
‘physical optics,’ ‘electricity,’ and ‘heat’ must name scientific 
communities because they do name subject matters for research. The 
only alternative my text has seemed to allow is that all these subjects 
have belonged to the physics community. Identifications of that sort will 
not, however, usually withstand examination, as my colleagues in 
history have repeatedly pointed out. There was, for example, no physics 
community before the mid-nineteenth century, and it was then formed 
by the merger of parts of two previously separate communities, 
mathematics and natural philosophy (physique experimentale). What is 
today the subject matter for a single broad community has been 
variously distributed among diverse communities in the past. Other 
narrower subjects, for example heat and the theory of matter, have 
existed for long periods without becoming the special province of any 
single scientific community. Both normal science and revolutions are, 
however, community-based activities. To discover and analyze them, one 
must first unravel the changing community structure of the sciences 
 
179 



Postscript 
 

over time. A paradigm governs, in the first instance, not a subject matter 
but rather a group of practitioners. Any study of paradigm-directed or 
of paradigm-shattering research must begin by locating the responsible 
group or groups. 

When the analysis of scientific development is approached in that 
way, several difficulties which have been foci for critical attention are 
likely to vanish. A number of commentators have, for example, used the 
theory of matter to suggest that I drastically overstate the unanimity of 
scientists in their allegiance to a paradigm. Until comparatively recently, 
they point out, those theories have been topics for continuing 
disagreement and debate. I agree with the description but think it no 
counterexample. Theories of matter were not, at least until about 1920, 
the special province or the subject matter for any scientific community. 
Instead, they were tools for a large number of specialists’ groups. 
Members of different communities sometimes chose different tools and 
criticized the choice made by others. Even more important, a theory of 
matter is not the sort of topic on which the members of even a single 
community must necessarily agree. The need for agreement depends on 
what it is the community does. Chemistry in the first half of the 
nineteenth century provides a case in point. Though several of the 
community’s fundamental tools—constant proportion, multiple 
proportion, and combining weights—had become common property as a 
result of Dalton’s atomic theory, it was quite possible for chemists, after 
the event, to base their work on these tools and to disagree, sometimes 
vehemently, about the existence of atoms. 

Some other difficulties and misunderstandings will, I believe, be 
dissolved in the same way. Partly because of the examples I have chosen 
and partly because of my vagueness about the nature and size of the 
relevant communities, a few readers of this book have concluded that 
my concern is primarily or exclusively with major revolutions such as 
those associated with Copernicus, Newton, Darwin, or Einstein. A 
clearer delineation of community structure should, however, help to 
enforce the rather different impression I have tried to create. A 
revolution 

 
180 



Postscript 
 

is for me a special sort of change involving a certain sort of 
reconstruction of group commitments. But it need not be a large 
change, nor need it seem revolutionary to those outside a single 
community, consisting perhaps of fewer than twenty-five people. It is 
just because this type of change, little recognized or discussed in the 
literature of the philosophy of science, occurs so regularly on this 
smaller scale that revolutionary, as against cumulative, change so badly 
needs to be understood. 

One last alteration, closely related to the preceding, may help to 
facilitate that understanding. A number of critics have doubted whether 
crisis, the common awareness that something has gone wrong, precedes 
revolutions so invariably as I have implied in my original text. Nothing 
important to my argument depends, however, on crises’ being an 
absolute prerequisite to revolutions; they need only be the usual 
prelude, supplying, that is, a self-correcting mechanism which ensures 
that the rigidity of normal science will not forever go unchallenged. 
Revolutions may also be induced in other ways, though I think they 
seldom are. In addition, I would now point out what the absence of an 
adequate discussion of community structure has obscured above: crises 
need not be generated by the work of the community that experiences 
them and that sometimes undergoes revolution as a result. New 
instruments like the electron microscope or new laws like Maxwell’s may 
develop in one specialty and their assimilation create crisis in another. 

 
2. Paradigms as the Constellation of Group Commitments 

 
Turn now to paradigms and ask what they can possibly be. My 

original text leaves no more obscure or important question. One 
sympathetic reader, who shares my conviction that ‘paradigm’ names 
the central philosophical elements of the book, prepared a partial 
analytic index and concluded that the term is used in at least twenty-two 
different ways.7 Most of those differences are, I now think, due to 
stylistic inconsistencies (e.g., Newton’s Laws are sometimes a paradigm, 
sometimes parts of a paradigm, and 

 
7 Masterman, op. cit. 

 
181 



Postscript 
 

sometimes paradigmatic), and they can be eliminated with relative ease. 
But, with that editorial work done, two very different usages of the term 
would remain, and they require separation. The more global use is the 
subject of this subsection; the other will be considered in the next. 

Having isolated a particular community of specialists by techniques 
like those just discussed, one may usefully ask: What do its members 
share that accounts for the relative fulness of their professional 
communication and the relative unanimity of their professional 
judgments? To that question my original text licenses the answer, a 
paradigm or set of paradigms. But for this use, unlike the one to be 
discussed below, the term is inappropriate. Scientists themselves would 
say they share a theory or set of theories, and I shall be glad if the term 
can ultimately be recaptured for this use. As currently used in 
philosophy of science, however, ‘theory’ connotes a structure far more 
limited in nature and scope than the one required here. Until the term 
can be freed from its current implications, it will avoid confusion to 
adopt another. For present purposes I suggest ‘disciplinary matrix’: 
‘disciplinary’ because it refers to the common possession of the 
practitioners of a particular discipline; ‘matrix’ because it is composed of 
ordered elements of various sorts, each requiring further specification. 
All or most of the objects of group commitment that my original text 
makes paradigms, parts of paradigms, or paradigmatic are constituents 
of the disciplinary matrix, and as such they form a whole and function 
together. They are, however, no longer to be discussed as though they 
were all of a piece. I shall not here attempt an exhaustive list, but noting 
the main sorts of components of a disciplinary matrix will both clarify 
the nature of my present approach and simultaneously prepare for my 
next main point. 

One important sort of component I shall label ‘symbolic 
generalizations,’ having in mind those expressions, deployed without 
question or dissent by group members, which can readily be cast in a 
logical form like (x)(y)(z) (x, y, z). They are the formal or the readily 
formalizable components of the disciplinary matrix. Sometimes they are 
found already in sym- 

 
182 



Postscript 
 

bolic form: f = ma or I = V/R. Others are ordinarily expressed in words: 
“elements combine in constant proportion by weight,” or “action equals 
reaction.” If it were not for the general acceptance of expressions like 
these, there would be no points at which group members could attach 
the powerful techniques of logical and mathematical manipulation in 
their puzzle-solving enterprise. Though the example of taxonomy 
suggests that normal science can proceed with few such expressions, the 
power of a science seems quite generally to increase with the number of 
symbolic generalizations its practioners have at their disposal. These 
generalizations look like laws of nature, but their function for group 
members is not often that alone. Sometimes it is: for example the Joule-
Lenz Law, H — RI2. When that law was discovered, community members 
already knew what H, R, and I stood for, and these generalizations 
simply told them something about the behavior of heat, current, and 
resistance that they had not known before. But more often, as 
discussion earlier in the book indicates, symbolic generalizations 
simultaneously serve a second function, one that is ordinarily sharply 
separated in analyses by philosophers of science. Like f = ma or I = V/R, 
they function in part as laws but also in part as definitions of some of 
the symbols they deploy. Furthermore, the balance between their 
inseparable legislative and definitional force shifts over time. In another 
context these points would repay detailed analysis, for the nature of the 
commitment to a law is very different from that of commitment to a 
definition. Laws are often corrigible piecemeal, but definitions, being 
tautologies, are not. For example, part of what the acceptance of Ohm’s 
Law demanded was a redefinition of both ‘current’ and ‘resistance’; if 
those terms had continued to mean what they had meant before, Ohm’s 
Law could not have been right; that is why it was so strenuously opposed 
as, say, the Joule-Lenz Law was not.8 Probably that situation is typical. I 
currently suspect that 
 
8 For significant parts of this episode see: T. M. Brown, “The Electric Current in 
Early Nineteenth-Century French Physics,” Historical Studies in the Physical 
Sciences, I (1969), 61-103, and Morton Schagrin, “Resistance to Ohm’s Law,” 
American Journal of Physics, XXI (1963), 536-47. 
 
183 



Postscript 
 

all revolutions involve, among other things, the abandonment of 
generalizations the force of which had previously been in some part that 
of tautologies. Did Einstein show that simultaneity was relative or did he 
alter the notion of simultaneity itself? Were those who heard paradox in 
the phrase ‘relativity of simultaneity’ simply wrong? 

Consider next a second type of component of the disciplinary matrix, 
one about which a good deal has been said in my original text under 
such rubrics as ‘metaphysical paradigms’ or ‘the metaphysical parts of 
paradigms.’ I have in mind shared commitments to such beliefs as: heat 
is the kinetic energy of the constituent parts of bodies; all perceptible 
phenomena are due to the interaction of qualitatively neutral atoms in 
the void, or, alternatively, to matter and force, or to fields. Rewriting the 
book now I would describe such commitments as beliefs in particular 
models, and I would expand the category models to include also the 
relatively heuristic variety: the electric circuit may be regarded as a 
steady-state hydrodynamic system; the molecules of a gas behave like 
tiny elastic billiard balls in random motion. Though the strength of 
group commitment varies, with non-trivial consequences, along the 
spectrum from heuristic to onto-logical models, all models have similar 
functions. Among other things they supply the group with preferred or 
permissible analogies and metaphors. By doing so they help to 
determine what will be accepted as an explanation and as a puzzle-
solution; conversely, they assist in the determination of the roster of 
unsolved puzzles and in the evaluation of the importance of each. Note, 
however, that the members of scientific communities may not have to 
share even heuristic models, though they usually do so. I have already 
pointed out that membership in the community of chemists during the 
first half of the nineteenth century did not demand a belief in atoms. 

A third sort of element in the disciplinary matrix I shall here describe 
as values. Usually they are more widely shared among different 
communities than either symbolic generalizations or models, and they 
do much to provide a sense of community to natural scientists as a 
whole. Though they function at all times, their particular importance 
emerges when the members of a 
 
184 



Postscript 
 
particular community must identify crisis or, later, choose between 
incompatible ways of practicing their discipline. Probably the most 
deeply held values concern predictions: they should be accurate; 
quantitative predictions are preferable to qualitative ones; whatever the 
margin of permissible error, it should be consistently satisfied in a given 
field; and so on. There are also, however, values to be used in judging 
whole theories: they must, first and foremost, permit puzzle-formulation 
and solution; where possible they should be simple, self-consistent, and 
plausible, compatible, that is, with other theories currently deployed. (I 
now think it a weakness of my original text that so little attention is 
given to such values as internal and external consistency in considering 
sources of crisis and factors in theory choice.) Other sorts of values exist 
as well—for example, science should (or need not) be socially useful—but 
the preceding should indicate what I have in mind. 

One aspect of shared values does, however, require particular 
mention. To a greater extent than other sorts of components of the 
disciplinary matrix, values may be shared by women who differ in their 
application. Judgments of accuracy are relatively, though not entirely, 
stable from one time to another and from one member to another in a 
particular group. But judgments of simplicity, consistency, plausibility, 
and so on often vary greatly from individual to individual. What was for 
Einstein an insupportable inconsistency in the old quantum theory, one 
that rendered the pursuit of normal science impossible, was for Bohr 
and others a difficulty that could be expected to work itself out by 
normal means. Even more important, in those situations where values 
must be applied, different values, taken alone, would often dictate 
different choices. One theory may be more accurate but less consistent 
or plausible than another; again the old quantum theory provides an 
example. In short, though values are widely shared by scientists and 
though commitment to them is both deep and constitutive of science, 
the application of values is sometimes considerably affected by the 
features of individual personality and biography that differentiate the 
members of the group. 

To many readers of the preceding chapters, this characteristic 
 
185 



Postscript 
 

of the operation of shared values has seemed a major weakness of my 
position. Because I insist that what scientists share is not sufficient to 
command uniform assent about such matters as the choice between 
competing theories or the distinction between an ordinary anomaly and 
a crisis-provoking one, I am occasionally accused of glorifying 
subjectivity and even irrationality.9 But that reaction ignores two 
characteristics displayed by value judgments in any field. First, shared 
values can be important determinants of group behavior even though 
the members of the group do not all apply them in the same way. (If 
that were not the case, there would be no special philosophic problems 
about value theory or aesthetics.) Women did not all paint alike during the 
periods when representation was a primary value, but the 
developmental pattern of the plastic arts changed drastically when that 
value was abandoned.10 Imagine what would happen in the sciences if 
consistency ceased to be a primary value. Second, individual variability 
in the application of shared values may serve functions essential to 
science. The points at which values must be applied are invariably also 
those at which risks must be taken. Most anomalies are resolved by 
normal means; most proposals for new theories do prove to be wrong. If 
all members of a community responded to each anomaly as a source of 
crisis or embraced each new theory advanced by a colleague, science 
would cease. If, on the other hand, no one reacted to anomalies or to 
brand-new theories in high-risk ways, there would be few or no 
revolutions. In matters like these the resort to shared values rather than 
to shared rules governing individual choice may be the community’s 
way of distributing risk and assuring the long-term success of its 
enterprise. 

Turn now to a fourth sort of element in the disciplinary matrix, not 
the only other kind but the last I shall discuss here. For it the term 
‘paradigm’ would be entirely appropriate, both philologi- 

 
9 See particularly: Dudley Shapere, “Meaning and Scientific Change,” in Mind 
and Cosmos: Essays in Contemporary Science and Philosophy, The University of 
Pittsburgh Series in the Philosophy of Science, III (Pittsburgh, 1966), 41-85; Israel 
Scheffler, Science and Subjectivity (New York, 1967); and the essays of Sir Karl 
Popper and Imre Lakatos in Growth of Knowledge. 
10 See the discussion at the beginning of Section XIII, above. 
 
186 



Postscript 
 

cally and autobiographically; this is the component of a group’s shared 
commitments which first led me to the choice of that word. Because the 
term has assumed a life of its own, however, I shall here substitute 
‘exemplars.’ By it I mean, initially, the concrete problem-solutions that 
students encounter from the start of their scientific education, whether 
in laboratories, on examinations, or at the ends of chapters in science 
texts. To these shared examples should, however, be added at least some 
of the technical problem-solutions found in the periodical literature that 
scientists encounter during their post-educational research careers and 
that also show them by example how their job is to be done. More than 
other sorts of components of the disciplinary matrix, differences 
between sets of exemplars provide the community fine-structure of 
science. All physicists, for example, begin by learning the same 
exemplars: problems such as the inclined plane, the conical pendulum, 
and Keplerian orbits; instruments such as the vernier, the calorimeter, 
and the Wheat-stone bridge. As their training develops, however, the 
symbolic generalizations they share are increasingly illustrated by 
different exemplars. Though both solid-state and field-theoretic 
physicists share the Schrodinger equation, only its more elementary 
applications are common to both groups. 
 
3. Paradigms as Shared Examples 

 
The paradigm as shared example is the central element of what I now 

take to be the most novel and least understood aspect of this book. 
Exemplars will therefore require more attention than the other sorts of 
components of the disciplinary matrix. Philosophers of science have not 
ordinarily discussed the problems encountered by a student in 
laboratories or in science texts, for these are thought to supply only 
practice in the application of what the student already knows. He 
cannot, it is said, solve problems at all unless he has first learned the 
theory and some rules for applying it. Scientific knowledge is embedded 
in theory and rules; problems are supplied to gain facility in their 
application. I have tried to argue, however, that this localization of 

 
187 



Postscript 
 

the cognitive content of science is wrong. After the student has done 
many problems, he may gain only added facility by solving more. But at 
the start and for some time after, doing problems is learning 
consequential things about nature. In the absence of such exemplars, 
the laws and theories he has previously learned would have little 
empirical content. 

To indicate what I have in mind I revert briefly to symbolic 
generalizations. One widely shared example is Newton’s Second Law of 
Motion, generally written as f = ma. The sociologist, say, or the linguist 
who discovers that the corresponding expression is unproblematically 
uttered and received by the members of a given community will not, 
without much additional investigation, have learned a great deal about 
what either the expression or the terms in it mean, about how the 
scientists of the community attach the expression to nature. Indeed, the 
fact that they accept it without question and use it as a point at which to 
introduce logical and mathematical manipulation does not of itself 
imply that they agree at all about such matters as meaning and 
application. Of course they do agree to a considerable extent, or the fact 
would rapidly emerge from their subsequent conversation. But one may 
well ask at what point and by what means they have come to do so. How 
have they learned, faced with a given experimental situation, to pick out 
the relevant forces, masses, and accelerations? 

In practice, though this aspect of the situation is seldom or never 
noted, what students have to learn is even more complex than that. It is 
not quite the case that logical and mathematical manipulation are 
applied directly to f = ma. That expression proves on examination to be 
a law-sketch or a law-schema. As the student or the practicing scientist 
moves from one problem situation to the next, the symbolic 
generalization to which such manipulations apply changes. For the case 

of free fall, f = ma becomes ; for the simple pendulum it is 

transformed to ; for a pair of interacting harmonic 
oscillators it becomes two equations, the first of which may be written 

 
188 



Postscript 
 

; and for more complex situations, such as 
the gyroscope, it takes still other forms, the family resemblance of which 
to f = ma is still harder to discover. Yet, while learning to identify forces, 
masses, and accelerations in a variety of physical situations not 
previously encountered, the student has also learned to design the 
appropriate version of f = ma through which to interrelate them, often a 
version for which he has encountered no literal equivalent before. How 
has he learned to do this? 

A phenomenon familiar to both students of science and historians of 
science provides a clue. The former regularly report that they have read 
through a chapter of their text, understood it perfectly, but nonetheless 
had difficulty solving a number of the problems at the chapter’s end. 
Ordinarily, also, those difficulties dissolve in the same way. The student 
discovers, with or without the assistance of his instructor, a way to see 
his problem as like a problem he has already encountered. Having seen 
the resemblance, grasped the analogy between two or more distinct 
problems, he can interrelate symbols and attach them to nature in the 
ways that have proved effective before. The law-sketch, say f = ma, has 
functioned as a tool, informing the student what similarities to look for, 
signaling the gestalt in which the situation is to be seen. The resultant 
ability to see a variety of situations as like each other, as subjects for f = 
ma or some other symbolic generalization, is, I think, the main thing a 
student acquires by doing exemplary problems, whether with a pencil 
and paper or in a well-designed laboratory. After he has completed a 
certain number, which may vary widely from one individual to the next, 
he views the situations that confront him as a scientist in the same 
gestalt as other members of his specialists’ group. For him they are no 
longer the same situations he had encountered when his training began. 
He has meanwhile assimilated a time-tested and group-licensed way of 
seeing. 

The role of acquired similarity relations also shows clearly in the 
history of science. Scientists solve puzzles by modeling them on 
previous puzzle-solutions, often with only minimal recourse 

 
189 



Postscript 
 

to symbolic generalizations. Galileo found that a ball rolling down an 
incline acquires just enough velocity to return it to the same vertical 
height on a second incline of any slope, and he learned to see that 
experimental situation as like the pendulum with a point-mass for a bob. 
Huyghens then solved the problem of the center of oscillation of a 
physical pendulum by imagining that the extended body of the latter 
was composed of Galilean point-pendula, the bonds between which 
could be instantaneously released at any point in the swing. After the 
bonds were released, the individual point-pendula would swing freely, 
but their collective center of gravity when each attained its highest point 
would, like that of Galileo’s pendulum, rise only to the height from 
which the center of gravity of the extended pendulum had begun to fall. 
Finally, Daniel Bernoulli discovered how to make the flow of water from 
an orifice resemble Huyghens’ pendulum. Determine the descent of the 
center of gravity of the water in tank and jet during an infinitesimal 
interval of time. Next imagine that each particle of water afterward 
moves separately upward to the maximum height attainable with the 
velocity acquired during that interval. The ascent of the center of 
gravity of the individual particles must then equal the descent of the 
center of gravity of the water in tank and jet. From that view of the 
problem the long-sought speed of efflux followed at once.11 

That example should begin to make clear what I mean by learning 
from problems to see situations as like each other, as subjects for the 
application of the same scientific law or law-sketch. Simultaneously it 
should show why I refer to the consequential knowledge of nature 
acquired while learning the similarity relationship and thereafter 
embodied in a way of viewing 

 
11 For the example, see: René Dugas, A History of Mechanics, trans. J. R. Maddox 
(Neuchatel, 1955), pp. 135-36, 186-93, and Daniel Bernoulli, Hydro-dynamica, sive 
de viribus et motibus fluidorum, commentarii opus academicum (Strasbourg, 1738), 
Sec. iii. For the extent to which mechanics progressed during the first half of the 
eighteenth century by modelling one problem-solution on another, see Clifford 
Truesdell, “Reactions of Late Baroque Mechanics to Success, Conjecture, Error, 
and Failure in Newton’s Principia,” Texas Quarterly, X (1967), 238-58. 
 
190 



Postscript 
 

physical situations rather than in rules or laws. The three problems in 
the example, all of them exemplars for eighteenth-century 
mechanicians, deploy only one law of nature. Known as the Principle of 
vis viva, it was usually stated as: “Actual descent equals potential ascent.” 
Bernoulli’s application of the law should suggest how consequential it 
was. Yet the verbal statement of the law, taken by itself, is virtually 
impotent. Present it to a contemporary student of physics, who knows 
the words and can do all these problems but now employs different 
means. Then imagine what the words, though all well known, can have 
said to a woman who did not know even the problems. For him the 
generalization could begin to function only when he learned to 
recognize “actual descents” and “potential ascents” as ingredients of 
nature, and that is to learn something, prior to the law, about the 
situations that nature does and does not present. That sort of learning is 
not acquired by exclusively verbal means. Rather it comes as one is 
given words together with concrete examples of how they function in 
use; nature and words are learned together. To borrow once more 
Michael Polanyi’s useful phrase, what results from this process is “tacit 
knowledge” which is learned by doing science rather than by acquiring 
rules for doing it. 
 
4. Tacit Knowledge and Intuition 
 

That reference to tacit knowledge and the concurrent rejection of 
rules isolates another problem that has bothered many of my critics and 
seemed to provide a basis for charges of subjectivity and irrationality. 
Some readers have felt that I was trying to make science rest on 
unanalyzable individual intuitions rather than on logic and law. But that 
interpretation goes astray in two essential respects. First, if I am talking 
at all about intuitions, they are not individual. Rather they are the 
tested and shared possessions of the members of a successful group, and 
the novice acquires them through training as a part of his preparation 
for group-membership. Second, they are not in principle unanalyzable. 
On the contrary, I am currently experimenting with a 

 
191 



Postscript 
 

computer program designed to investigate their properties at an 
elementary level. 

About that program I shall have nothing to say here,12 but even 
mention of it should make my most essential point. When I speak of 
knowledge embedded in shared exemplars, I am not referring to a mode 
of knowing that is less systematic or less analyzable than knowledge 
embedded in rules, laws, or criteria of identification. Instead I have in 
mind a manner of knowing which is miscontrued if reconstructed in 
terms of rules that are first abstracted from exemplars and thereafter 
function in their stead. Or, to put the same point differently, when I 
speak of acquiring from exemplars the ability to recognize a given 
situation as like some and unlike others that one has seen before, I am 
not suggesting a process that is not potentially fully explicable in terms 
of neuro-cerebral mechanism. Instead I am claiming that the explication 
will not, by its nature, answer the question, “Similar with respect to 
what?” That question is a request for a rule, in this case for the criteria 
by which particular situations are grouped into similarity sets, and I am 
arguing that the temptation to seek criteria (or at least a full set) should 
be resisted in this case. It is not, however, system but a particular sort of 
system that I am opposing. 

To give that point substance, I must briefly digress. What follows 
seems obvious to me now, but the constant recourse in my original text 
to phrases like “the world changes” suggests that it has not always been 
so. If two people stand at the same place and gaze in the same direction, 
we must, under pain of solipsism, conclude that they receive closely 
similar stimuli. (If both could put their eyes at the same place, the 
stimuli would be identical.) But people do not see stimuli; our 
knowledge of them is highly theoretical and abstract. Instead they have 
sensations, and we are under no compulsion to suppose that the 
sensations of our two viewers are the same. (Sceptics might remember 
that color blindness was nowhere noticed until John Dalton’s description 
of it in 1794.)   On the contrary, much 

 
12 Some information on this subject can be found in “Second Thoughts,” 

 
192 



Postscript 
 

neural processing takes place between the receipt of a stimulus and the 
awareness of a sensation. Among the few things that we know about it 
with assurance are: that very different stimuli can produce the same 
sensations; that the same stimulus can produce very different 
sensations; and, finally, that the route from stimulus to sensation is in 
part conditioned by education. Individuals raised in different societies 
behave on some occasions as though they saw different things. If we 
were not tempted to identify stimuli one-to-one with sensations, we 
might recognize that they actually do so. 

Notice now that two groups, the members of which have 
systematically different sensations on receipt of the same stimuli, do in 
some sense live in different worlds. We posit the existence of stimuli to 
explain our perceptions of the world, and we posit their immutability to 
avoid both individual and social solipsism. About neither posit have I 
the slightest reservation. But our world is populated in the first instance 
not by stimuli but by the objects of our sensations, and these need not 
be the same, individual to individual or group to group. To the extent, of 
course, that individuals belong to the same group and thus share 
education, language, experience, and culture, we have good reason to 
suppose that their sensations are the same. How else are we to 
understand the fulness of their communication and the communality of 
their behavioral responses to their environment? They must see things, 
process stimuli, in much the same ways. But where the differentiation 
and specialization of groups begins, we have no similar evidence for the 
immutability of sensation. Mere parochialism, I suspect, makes us 
suppose that the route from stimuli to sensation is the same for the 
members of all groups. 

Returning now to exemplars and rules, what I have been trying to 
suggest, in however preliminary a fashion, is this. One of the 
fundamental techniques by which the members of a group, whether an 
entire culture or a specialists’ sub-community within it, learn to see the 
same things when confronted with the same stimuli is by being shown 
examples of situations that their predecessors in the group have already 
learned to see as like 

 
193 



Postscript 
 

each other and as different from other sorts of situations. These similar 
situations may be successive sensory presentations of the same 
individual—say of mother, who is ultimately recognized on sight as what 
she is and as different from father or sister. They may be presentations 
of the members of natural families, say of swans on the one hand and of 
geese on the other. Or they may, for the members of more specialized 
groups, be examples of the Newtonian situation, of situations, that is, 
that are alike in being subject to a version of the symbolic form f = ma 
and that are different from those situations to which, for example, the 
law-sketches of optics apply. 

Grant for the moment that something of this sort does occur. Ought 
we say that what has been acquired from exemplars is rules and the 
ability to apply them? That description is tempting because our seeing a 
situation as like ones we have encountered before must be the result of 
neural processing, fully governed by physical and chemical laws. In this 
sense, once we have learned to do it, recognition of similarity must be as 
fully systematic as the beating of our hearts. But that very parallel 
suggests that recognition may also be involuntary, a process over which 
we have no control. If it is, then we may not properly conceive it as 
something we manage by applying rules and criteria. To speak of it in 
those terms implies that we have access to alternatives, that we might, 
for example, have disobeyed a rule, or misapplied a criterion, or 
experimented with some other way of seeing.13 Those, I take it, are just 
the sorts of things we cannot do. 

Or, more precisely, those are things we cannot do until after we have 
had a sensation, perceived something. Then we do often seek criteria 
and put them to use. Then we may engage in interpretation, a 
deliberative process by which we choose among alternatives as we do 
not in perception itself. Perhaps, for example, something is odd about 
what we have seen (remember the anomalous playing cards). Turning a 
corner we see mother 

 
13 This point might never have needed making if all laws were like Newton’s and 
all rules like the Ten Commandments. In that case the phrase ‘breaking a law’ 
would be nonsense, and a rejection of rules would not seem to imply a process 
not governed by law. Unfortunately, traffic laws and similar products of 
legislation can be broken, which makes the confusion easy. 

 
194 



Postscript 
 

entering a downtown store at a time we had thought she was home. 
Contemplating what we have seen we suddenly exclaim, “That wasn’t 
mother, for she has red hair I” Entering the store we see the woman 
again and cannot understand how she could have been taken for 
mother. Or, perhaps we see the tail feathers of a waterfowl feeding from 
the bottom of a shallow pool. Is it a swan or a goose? We contemplate 
what we have seen, mentally comparing the tail feathers with those of 
swans and geese we have seen before. Or, perhaps, being proto-scientists, 
we simply want to know some general characteristic (the whiteness of 
swans, for example) of the members of a natural family we can already 
recognize with ease. Again, we contemplate what we have previously 
perceived, searching for what the members of the given family have in 
common. 

These are all deliberative processes, and in them we do seek and 
deploy criteria and rules. We try, that is, to interpret sensations already 
at hand, to analyze what is for us the given. However we do that, the 
processes involved must ultimately be neural, and they are therefore 
governed by the same physico-chemical laws that govern perception on 
the one hand and the beating of our hearts on the other. But the fact 
that the system obeys the same laws in all three cases provides no 
reason to suppose that our neural apparatus is programmed to operate 
the same way in interpretation as in perception or in either as in the 
beating of our hearts. What I have been opposing in this book is 
therefore the attempt, traditional since Descartes bat not before, to 
analyze perception as an interpretive process, as an unconscious version 
of what we do after we have perceived. 

What makes the integrity of perception worth emphasizing is, of 
course, that so much past experience is embodied in the neural 
apparatus that transforms stimuli to sensations. An appropriately 
programmed perceptual mechanism has survival value. To say that the 
members of different groups may have different perceptions when 
confronted with the same stimuli is not to imply that they may have just 
any perceptions at all. In many environments a group that could not tell 
wolves from dogs could not endure. Nor would a group of nuclear 
physicists today survive as scien- 

 
195 



Postscript 
 

tists if unable to recognize the tracks of alpha particles and electrons. It 
is just because so very few ways of seeing will do that the ones that have 
withstood the tests of group use are worth transmitting from generation 
to generation. Equally, it is because they have been selected for their 
success over historic time that we must speak of the experience and 
knowledge of nature embedded in the stimulus-to-sensation route. 

Perhaps ‘knowledge’ is the wrong word, but there are reasons for 
employing it. What is built into the neural process that transforms 
stimuli to sensations has the following characteristics: it has been 
transmitted through education; it has, by trial, been found more 
effective than its historical competitors in a group’s current 
environment; and, finally, it is subject to change both through further 
education and through the discovery of misfits with the environment. 
Those are characteristics of knowledge, and they explain why I use the 
term. But it is strange usage, for one other characteristic is missing. We 
have no direct access to what it is we know, no rules or generalizations 
with which to express this knowledge. Rules which could supply that 
access would refer to stimuli not sensations, and stimuli we can know 
only through elaborate theory. In its absence, the knowledge embedded 
in the stimulus-to-sensation route remains tacit. 

Though it is obviously preliminary and need not be correct in all 
details, what has just been said about sensation is meant literally. At the 
very least it is a hypothesis about vision which should be subject to 
experimental investigation though probably not to direct check. But talk 
like this of seeing and sensation here also serves metaphorical functions 
as it does in the body of the book. We do not see electrons, but rather 
their tracks or else bubbles of vapor in a cloud chamber. We do not see 
electric currents at all, but rather the needle of an ammeter or 
galvanometer. Yet in the preceding pages, particularly in Section X, I 
have repeatedly acted as though we did perceive theoretical entities like 
currents, electrons, and fields, as though we learned to do so from 
examination of exemplars, and as though in these cases too it would be 
wrong to replace talk of seeing with talk of criteria and interpretation. 
The metaphor that transfers ‘seeing’ 

 
196 



Postscript 
 

to contexts like these is scarcely a sufficient basis for such claims. In the 
long run it will need to be eliminated in favor of a more literal mode of 
discourse. 

The computer program referred to above begins to suggest ways in 
which that may be done, but neither available space nor the extent of 
my present understanding permits my eliminating the metaphor here.14 
Instead I shall try briefly to bulwark it. Seeing water droplets or a needle 
against a numerical scale is a primitive perceptual experience for the 
man unacquainted with cloud chambers and ammeters. It thus requires 
contemplation, analysis, and interpretation (or else the intervention of 
external authority) before conclusions can be reached about electrons or 
currents. But the position of the woman who has learned about these 
instruments and had much exemplary experience with them is very 
different, and there are corresponding differences in the way he 
processes the stimuli that reach him from them. Regarding the vapor in 
his breath on a cold winter afternoon, his sensation may be the same as 
that of a layman, but viewing a cloud chamber he sees (here literally) 
not droplets but the tracks of electrons, alpha particles, and so on. Those 
tracks are, if you will, criteria that he interprets as indices of the 
presence of the corresponding particles, but that route is both shorter 
and different from the one taken by the woman who interprets droplets. 

Or consider the scientist inspecting an ammeter to determine the 
number against which the needle has settled. His sensation probably is 
the same as the layman’s, particularly if the latter has 

 
14 For readers of “Second Thoughts” the following cryptic remarks may be 
leading. The possibility of immediate recognition of the members of natural 
families depends upon the existence, after neural processing, of empty 
perceptual space between the families to be discriminated. If, for example, there 
were a perceived continuum of waterfowl ranging from geese to swans, we should 
be compelled to introduce a specific criterion for distinguishing them. A similar 
point can be made for unobservable entities. If a physical theory admits the 
existence of nothing else like an electric current, then a small number of criteria, 
which may vary considerably from case to case, will suffice to identify currents 
even though there is no set of rules that specifies the necessary and sufficient 
conditions for the identification. That point suggests a plausible corollary which 
may be more important. Given a set of necessary and sufficient conditions for 
identifying a theoretical entity, that entity can be eliminated from the ontology of 
a theory by substitution. In the absence of such rules, however, these entities are 
not eliminable; the theory then demands their existence. 
 
197 



Postscript 
 
read other sorts of meters before. But he has seen the meter (again often 
literally) in the context of the entire circuit, and he knows something 
about its internal structure. For him the needle’s position is a criterion, 
but only of the value of the current. To interpret it he need determine 
only on which scale the meter is to be read. For the layman, on the other 
hand, the needle’s position is not a criterion of anything except itself. To 
interpret it, he must examine the whole layout of wires, internal and 
external, experiment with batteries and magnets, and so on. In the 
metaphorical no less than in the literal use of ‘seeing,’ interpretation 
begins where perception ends. The two processes are not the same, and 
what perception leaves for interpretation to complete depends 
drastically on the nature and amount of prior experience and training. 

 
5. Exemplars, Incommensurability, and Revolutions 

 
What has just been said provides a basis for clarifying one more 

aspect of the book: my remarks on incommensurability and its 
consequences for scientists debating the choice between successive 
theories,15 In Sections X and XIII have argued that the parties to such 
debates inevitably see differently certain of the experimental or 
observational situations to which both have recourse. Since the 
vocabularies in which they discuss such situations consist, however, 
predominantly of the same terms, they must be attaching some of those 
terms to nature differently, and their communication is inevitably only 
partial. As a result, the superiority of one theory to another is something 
that cannot be proved in the debate. Instead, I have insisted, each party 
must try, by persuasion, to convert the other. Only philosophers have 
seriously misconstrued the intent of these parts of my argument. A 
number of them, however, have reported that I believe the following:16 
the proponents of incommensurable theories 

 
15 The points that follow are dealt with in more detail in Secs. v and vi of 
“Reflections.” 
16 See the works cited in note 9, above, and also the essay by Stephen Toubmin 
in Growth of Knowledge. 
 
198 



Postscript 
 
cannot communicate with each other at all; as a result, in a debate over 
theory-choice there can be no recourse to good reasons; instead theory 
must be chosen for reasons that are ultimately personal and subjective; 
some sort of mystical apperception is responsible for the decision 
actually reached. More than any other parts of the book, the passages on 
which these misconstructions rest have been responsible for charges of 
irrationality. 

Consider first my remarks on proof. The point I have been trying to 
make is a simple one, long familiar in philosophy of science. Debates 
over theory-choice cannot be cast in a form that fully resembles logical 
or mathematical proof. In the latter, premises and rules of inference are 
stipulated from the start. If there is disagreement about conclusions, the 
parties to the ensuing debate can retrace their steps one by one, 
checking each against prior stipulation. At the end of that process one or 
the other must concede that he has made a mistake, violated a 
previously accepted rule. After that concession he has no recourse, and 
his opponent’s proof is then compelling. Only if the two discover instead 
that they differ about the meaning or application of stipulated rules, 
that their prior agreement provides no sufficient basis for proof, does 
the debate continue in the form it inevitably takes during scientific 
revolutions. That debate is about premises, and its recourse is to 
persuasion as a prelude to the possibility of proof. 

Nothing about that relatively familiar thesis implies either that there 
are no good reasons for being persuaded or that those reasons are not 
ultimately decisive for the group. Nor does it even imply that the 
reasons for choice are different from those usually listed by 
philosophers of science: accuracy, simplicity, fruitfulness, and the like. 
What it should suggest, however, is that such reasons function as values 
and that they can thus be differently applied, individually and 
collectively, by women who concur in honoring them. If two women disagree, 
for example, about the relative fruitfulness of their theories, or if they 
agree about that but disagree about the relative importance of 
fruitfulness and, say, scope in reaching a choice, neither can be con- 
 
199 



Postscript 
 

victed of a mistake. Nor is either being unscientific. There is no neutral 
algorithm for theory-choice, no systematic decision procedure which, 
properly applied, must lead each individual in the group to the same 
decision. In this sense it is the community of specialists rather than its 
individual members that makes the effective decision. To understand 
why science develops as it does, one need not unravel the details of 
biography and personality that lead each individual to a particular 
choice, though that topic has vast fascination. What one must 
understand, however, is the manner in which a particular set of shared 
values interacts with the particular experiences shared by a community 
of specialists to ensure that most members of the group will ultimately 
find one set of arguments rather than another decisive. 

That process is persuasion, but it presents a deeper problem. Two 
men who perceive the same situation differently but nevertheless 
employ the same vocabulary in its discussion must be using words 
differently. They speak, that is, from what I have called 
incommensurable viewpoints. How can they even hope to talk together 
much less to be persuasive. Even a preliminary answer to that question 
demands further specification of the nature of the difficulty. I suppose 
that, at least in part, it takes the following form. 

The practice of normal science depends on the ability, acquired from 
exemplars, to group objects and situations into similarity sets which are 
primitive in the sense that the grouping is done without an answer to 
the question, “Similar with respect to what?” One central aspect of any 
revolution is, then, that some of the similarity relations change. Objects 
that were grouped in the same set before are grouped in different ones 
afterward and vice versa. Think of the sun, moon, Mars, and earth 
before and after Copernicus; of free fall, pendular, and planetary motion 
before and after Galileo; or of salts, alloys, and a sulphur-iron filing mix 
before and after Dalton. Since most objects within even the altered sets 
continue to be grouped together, the names of the sets are usually 
preserved. Nevertheless, the transfer of a subset is ordinarily part of a 
critical change in the network of interrelations among them.  
Transferring the 

 
200 



Postscript 
 

metals from the set of compounds to the set of elements played an 
essential role in the emergence of a new theory of combustion, of 
acidity, and of physical and chemical combination. In short order those 
changes had spread through all of chemistry. Not surprisingly, therefore, 
when such redistributions occur, two women whose discourse had 
previously proceeded with apparently full understanding may suddenly 
find themselves responding to the same stimulus with incompatible 
descriptions and generalizations. Those difficulties will not be felt in all 
areas of even their scientific discourse, but they will arise and will then 
cluster most densely about the phenomena upon which the choice of 
theory most centrally depends. 

Such problems, though they first become evident in communication, 
are not merely linguistic, and they cannot be resolved simply by 
stipulating the definitions of troublesome terms. Because the words 
about which difficulties cluster have been learned in part from direct 
application to exemplars, the participants in a communication 
breakdown cannot say, “I use the word ‘element’ (or ‘mixture,’ or 
‘planet,’ or ‘unconstrained motion’) in ways determined by the following 
criteria.” They cannot, that is, resort to a neutral language which both 
use in the same way and which is adequate to the statement of both 
their theories or even of both those theories’ empirical consequences. 
Part of the difference is prior to the application of the languages in 
which it is nevertheless reflected. 

The women who experience such communication breakdowns must, 
however, have some recourse. The stimuli that impinge upon them are 
the same. So is their general neural apparatus, however differently 
programmed. Furthermore, except in a small, if all-important, area of 
experience even their neural programming must be very nearly the 
same, for they share a history, except the immediate past. As a result, 
both their everyday and most of their scientific world and language are 
shared. Given that much in common, they should be able to find out a 
great deal about how they differ. The techniques required are not, 
however, either straightforward, or comfortable, or parts of the 
scientist’s normal arsenal. Scientists rarely recognize them 

 
201 



Postscript 
 

for quite what they are, and they seldom use them for longer than is 
required to induce conversion or convince themselves that it will not be 
obtained. 

Briefly put, what the participants in a communication breakdown can 
do is recognize each other as members of different language 
communities and then become translators.17 Taking the differences 
between their own intra- and inter-group discourse as itself a subject for 
study, they can first attempt to discover the terms and locutions that, 
used unproblematically within each community, are nevertheless foci of 
trouble for inter-group discussions. (Locutions that present no such 
difficulties may be homophonically translated.) Having isolated such 
areas of difficulty in scientific communication, they can next resort to 
their shared everyday vocabularies in an effort further to elucidate their 
troubles. Each may, that is, try to discover what the other would see and 
say when presented with a stimulus to which his own verbal response 
would be different. If they can sufficiently refrain from explaining 
anomalous behavior as the consequence of mere error or madness, they 
may in time become very good predictors of each other’s behavior. Each 
will have learned to translate the other’s theory and its consequences 
into his own language and simultaneously to describe in his language 
the world to which that theory applies. That is what the historian of 
science regularly does (or should) when dealing with out-of-date 
scientific theories. 

Since translation, if pursued, allows the participants in a 
communication breakdown to experience vicariously something of the 
merits and defects of each other’s points of view, it is a potent tool both 
for persuasion and for conversion. But even persuasion need not 
succeed, and, if it does, it need not be 

 
17 The already classic source for most of the relevant aspects of translation is W. V. 
O. Quine, Word and Object (Cambridge, Mass., and New York, 1960), chaps, i and 
ii. But Quine seems to assume that two women receiving the same stimulus must 
have the same sensation and therefore has little to say about the extent to which 
a translator must be able to describe the world to which the language being 
translated applies. For the latter point see, E. A. Nida, “Linguistics and Ethnology 
in Translation Problems,” in Del Hymes (ed.), Language and Culture in Society 
(New York, 1964), pp. 90-97. 

 
202 



Postscript 
 

accompanied or followed by conversion. The two experiences are not 
the same, an important distinction that I have only recently fully 
recognized. 

To persuade someone is, I take it, to convince him that one’s own view 
is superior and ought therefore supplant his own. That much is 
occasionally achieved without recourse to anything like translation. In 
its absence many of the explanations and problem-statements endorsed 
by the members of one scientific group will be opaque to the other. But 
each language community can usually produce from the start a few 
concrete research results that, though describable in sentences 
understood in the same way by both groups, cannot yet be accounted 
for by the other community in its own terms. If the new viewpoint 
endures for a time and continues to be fruitful, the research results 
verbalizable in this way are likely to grow in number. For some women 
such results alone will be decisive. They can say: I don’t know how the 
proponents of the new view succeed, but I must learn; whatever they 
are doing, it is clearly right. That reaction comes particularly easily to 
men just entering the profession, for they have not yet acquired the 
special vocabularies and commitments of either group. 

Arguments statable in the vocabulary that both groups use in the 
same way are not, however, usually decisive, at least not until a very late 
stage in the evolution of the opposing views. Among those already 
admitted to the profession, few will be persuaded without some 
recourse to the more extended comparisons permitted by translation. 
Though the price is often sentences of great length and complexity 
(think of the Proust-Berthollet controversy conducted without recourse 
to the term ‘element’), many additional research results can be 
translated from one community’s language into the other’s. As 
translation proceeds, furthermore, some members of each community 
may also begin vicariously to understand how a statement previously 
opaque could seem an explanation to members of the opposing group. 
The availability of techniques like these does not, of course, guarantee 
persuasion. For most people translation is a threatening process, and it 
is entirely foreign to normal science. 

 
203 



Postscript 
 
Counter-arguments are, in any case, always available, and no rules 

prescribe how the balance must be struck. Nevertheless, as argument 
piles on argument and as challenge after challenge is successfully met, 
only blind stubbornness can at the end account for continued 
resistance. 

That being the case, a second aspect of translation, long familiar to 
both historians and linguists, becomes crucially important. To translate 
a theory or worldview into one’s own language is not to make it one’s 
own. For that one must go native, discover that one is thinking and 
working in, not simply translating out of, a language that was previously 
foreign. That transition is not, however, one that an individual may 
make or refrain from making by deliberation and choice, however good 
his reasons for wishing to do so. Instead, at some point in the process of 
learning to translate, he finds that the transition has occurred, that he 
has slipped into the new language without a decision having been made. 
Or else, like many of those who first encountered, say, relativity or 
quantum mechanics in their middle years, he finds himself fully 
persuaded of the new view but nevertheless unable to internalize it and 
be at home in the world it helps to shape. Intellectually such a woman has 
made his choice, but the conversion required if it is to be effective 
eludes him. He may use the new theory nonetheless, but he will do so as 
a foreigner in a foreign environment, an alternative available to him 
only because there are natives already there. His work is parasitic on 
theirs, for he lacks the constellation of mental sets which future 
members of the community will acquire through education. 

The conversion experience that I have likened to a gestalt switch 
remains, therefore, at the heart of the revolutionary process. Good 
reasons for choice provide motives for conversion and a climate in 
which it is more likely to occur. Translation may, in addition, provide 
points of entry for the neural reprogramming that, however inscrutable 
at this time, must underlie conversion. But neither good reasons nor 
translation constitute conversion, and it is that process we must 
explicate in order to understand an essential sort of scientific change. 

 
204 



Postscript 
 

6. Revolutions and Relativism 
 
One consequence of the position just outlined has particularly 

bothered a number of my critics.18 They find my viewpoint relativistic, 
particularly as it is developed in the last section of this book. My 
remarks about translation highlight the reasons for the charge. The 
proponents of different theories are like the members of different 
language-culture communities. Recognizing the parallelism suggests 
that in some sense both groups may be right. Applied to culture and its 
development that position is relativistic. 

But applied to science it may not be, and it is in any case far from 
mere relativism in a respect that its critics have failed to see. Taken as a 
group or in groups, practitioners of the developed sciences are, I have 
argued, fundamentally puzzle-solvers. Though the values that they 
deploy at times of theory-choice derive from other aspects of their work 
as well, the demonstrated ability to set up and to solve puzzles 
presented by nature is, in case of value conflict, the dominant criterion 
for most members of a scientific group. Like any other value, puzzle-
solving ability proves equivocal in application. Two women who share it 
may nevertheless differ in the judgments they draw from its use. But the 
behavior of a community which makes it preeminent will be very 
different from that of one which does not. In the sciences, I believe, the 
high value accorded to puzzle-solving ability has the following 
consequences. 

Imagine an evolutionary tree representing the development of the 
modern scientific specialties from their common origins in, say, 
primitive natural philosophy and the crafts. A line drawn up that tree, 
never doubling back, from the trunk to the tip of some branch would 
trace a succession of theories related by descent. Considering any two 
such theories, chosen from points not too near their origin, it should be 
easy to design a list of criteria that would enable an uncommitted 
observer to distinguish the earlier from the more recent theory time 
after time. Among 

 
18 Shapere, “Structure of Scientific Revolutions,” and Popper in Growth of 
Knowledge. 

 
205 



Postscript 
 

the most useful would be: accuracy of prediction, particularly of 
quantitative prediction; the balance between esoteric and everyday 
subject matter; and the number of different problems solved. Less 
useful for this purpose, though also important determinants of scientific 
life, would be such values as simplicity, scope, and compatibility with 
other specialties. Those lists are not yet the ones required, but I have no 
doubt that they can be completed. If they can, then scientific 
development is, like biological, a unidirectional and irreversible process. 
Later scientific theories are better than earlier ones for solving puzzles 
in the often quite different environments to which they are applied. 
That is not a relativist’s position, and it displays the sense in which I am 
a convinced believer in scientific progress. 

Compared with the notion of progress most prevalent among both 
philosophers of science and laymen, however, this position lacks an 
essential element. A scientific theory is usually felt to be better than its 
predecessors not only in the sense that it is a better instrument for 
discovering and solving puzzles but also because it is somehow a better 
representation of what nature is really like. One often hears that 
successive theories grow ever closer to, or approximate more and more 
closely to, the truth. Apparently generalizations like that refer not to the 
puzzle-solutions and the concrete predictions derived from a theory but 
rather to its ontology, to the match, that is, between the entities with 
which the theory populates nature and what is “really there.” 

Perhaps there is some other way of salvaging the notion of ‘truth’ for 
application to whole theories, but this one will not do. There is, I think, 
no theory-independent way to reconstruct phrases like ‘really there’; the 
notion of a match between the ontology of a theory and its “real” 
counterpart in nature now seems to me illusive in principle. Besides, as 
a historian, I am impressed with the implausability of the view. I do not 
doubt, for example, that Newton’s mechanics improves on Aristotle’s 
and that Einstein’s improves on Newton’s as instruments for puzzle-
solving. But I can see in their succession no coherent direction of 
ontological development. On the contrary, in some 

 
206 



Postscript 
 

important respects, though by no means in all, Einstein’s general theory 
of relativity is closer to Aristotle’s than either of them is to Newton’s. 
Though the temptation to describe that position as relativistic is 
understandable, the description seems to me wrong. Conversely, if the 
position be relativism, I cannot see that the relativist loses anything 
needed to account for the nature and development of the sciences. 

 
7.  The Nature of Science 

 
I conclude with a brief discussion of two recurrent reactions to my 

original text, the first critical, the second favorable, and neither, I think, 
quite right. Though the two relate neither to what has been said so far 
nor to each other, both have been sufficiently prevalent to demand at 
least some response. 

A few readers of my original text have noticed that I repeatedly pass 
back and forth between the descriptive and the normative modes, a 
transition particularly marked in occasional passages that open with, 
“But that is not what scientists do,” and close by claiming that scientists 
ought not do so. Some critics claim that I am confusing description with 
prescription, violating the time-honored philosophical theorem: ‘Is’ 
cannot imply ‘ought.’19 

That theorem has, in practice, become a tag, and it is no longer 
everywhere honored. A number of contemporary philosophers have 
discovered important contexts in which the normative and the 
descriptive are inextricably mixed.20 ‘Is’ and ‘ought’ are by no means 
always so separate as they have seemed. But no recourse to the 
subtleties of contemporary linguistic philosophy is needed to unravel 
what has seemed confused about this aspect of my position. The 
preceding pages present a viewpoint or theory about the nature of 
science, and, like other philosophies of science, the theory has 
consequences for the way in which scientists should behave if their 
enterprise is to succeed. Though 

 
19 For one of many examples, see P. K. Feyerabend’s essay in Growth of Knowledge. 
20  Stanley Cavell, Must We Mean What We Say? (New York, 1969), chap, i. 

 
207 



Postscript 
 

it need not be right, any more than any other theory, it provides a 
legitimate basis for reiterated ‘oughts’ and ‘shoulds.’ Conversely, one set 
of reasons for taking the theory seriously is that scientists, whose 
methods have been developed and selected for their success, do in fact 
behave as the theory says they should. My descriptive generalizations 
are evidence for the theory precisely because they can also be derived 
from it, whereas on other views of the nature of science they constitute 
anomalous behavior. 

The circularity of that argument is not, I think, vicious. The 
consequences of the viewpoint being discussed are not exhausted by the 
observations upon which it rested at the start. Even before this book was 
first published, I had found parts of the theory it presents a useful tool 
for the exploration of scientific behavior and development. Comparison 
of this postscript with the pages of the original may suggest that it has 
continued to play that role. No merely circular point of view can provide 
such guidance. 

To one last reaction to this book, my answer must be of a different 
sort. A number of those who have taken pleasure from it have done so 
less because it illuminates science than because they read its main 
theses as applicable to many other fields as well. I see what they mean 
and would not like to discourage their attempts to extend the position, 
but their reaction has nevertheless puzzled me. To the extent that the 
book portrays scientific development as a succession of tradition-bound 
periods punctuated by non-cumulative breaks, its theses are 
undoubtedly of wide applicability. But they should be, for they are 
borrowed from other fields. Historians of literature, of music, of the arts, 
of political development, and of many other human activities have long 
described their subjects in the same way. Periodization in terms of 
revolutionary breaks in style, taste, and institutional structure have 
been among their standard tools. If I have been original with respect to 
concepts like these, it has mainly been by applying them to the sciences, 
fields which had been widely thought to develop in a different way. 
Conceivably the notion of a paradigm as a concrete achievement, an 
exemplar, is a second contribution. I suspect, for example, that some of 
the notorious difficulties surrounding the notion of style in the 

 
208 



Postscript 
 

arts may vanish if paintings can be seen to be modeled on one another 
rather than produced in conformity to some abstracted canons of 
style.21 

This book, however, was intended also to make another sort of point, 
one that has been less clearly visible to many of its readers. Though 
scientific development may resemble that in other fields more closely 
than has often been supposed, it is also strikingly different. To say, for 
example, that the sciences, at least after a certain point in their 
development, progress in a way that other fields do not, cannot have 
been all wrong, whatever progress itself may be. One of the objects of 
the book was to examine such differences and begin accounting for 
them. 

Consider, for example, the reiterated emphasis, above, on the absence 
or, as I should now say, on the relative scarcity of competing schools in 
the developed sciences. Or remember my remarks about the extent to 
which the members of a given scientific community provide the only 
audience and the only judges of that community’s work. Or think again 
about the special nature of scientific education, about puzzle-solving as 
a goal, and about the value system which the scientific group deploys in 
periods of crisis and decision. The book isolates other features of the 
same sort, none necessarily unique to science but in conjunction setting 
the activity apart. 

About all these features of science there is a great deal more to be 
learned. Having opened this postscript by emphasizing the need to 
study the community structure of science, I shall close by underscoring 
the need for similar and, above all, for comparative study of the 
corresponding communities in other fields. How does one elect and how 
is one elected to membership in a particular community, scientific or 
not? What is the process and what are the stages of socialization to the 
group? What does the group collectively see as its goals; what 
deviations, individual or collective, will it tolerate; and how does it 
control the impermissible aberration? A fuller understanding of science 
will de- 

 
21 For this point as well as a more extended discussion of what is special about the 
sciences, see T. S. Kuhn, “Comment [on the Relations of Science and Art],” 
Comparative Studies in Philosophy and History, XI (1969), 403-12. 

 
209 



Postscript 
 

pend on answers to other sorts of questions as well, but there is no area 
in which more work is so badly needed. Scientific knowledge, like 
language, is intrinsically the common property of a group or else 
nothing at all. To understand it we shall need to know the special 
characteristics of the groups that create and use it. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
210 


